BOSTON
PUBLIC
LIBRARY

Forbes Library
Northampton, Mass.

Gift of
Miss Eunice Barrows

Young Luther and Ursula Cotta. p. 47.

<h1>HISTORICAL TALES FOR YOUNG PROTESTANTS.</h1>

PHILADELPHIA
AMERICAN SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION,
No. 1122 CHESTNUT STREET

<h2>CONTENTS.</h2>

THE MERCHANT OP LYONS - 9
THE GOOD PARSON OF LUTTERWORTH - 21
THE BOHEMIAN WITNESS - 34
THE MONK THAT SHOOK THE WORLD - 46
THE YOUTHFUL MARTYR - 63
THE MAIDEN MARTYR - 73
THE PROTESTANTS - 84
THE TRAGEDY OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S DAY - 97
THE FLIGHT OF THE HUGUENOTS - 110
THE NUN OF JOUARRE - 126
THE GUNPOWDER PLOT - 137
THE FORFEITED CROWN - 153
THE STORY OF THE ENGLISH BIBLE - 167

<h2>PREFACE.</h2>

Fact is as attractive as fiction, and is of much higher moral value. The pages of history contain incidents which equal in thrilling interest the most successful
efforts of the human imagination. From its ample records, the following short stories, connected with the rise and pro gress of Scriptural Protestantism, have been selected. If it has been found necessary to advert to the dark deeds of the papacy, it is from the conviction that the principles and spirit in which they originated in former ages are not extinct in the present day. In supplying
[viii]
books for the youngs it may be well to make them the means of fortifying their minds against soul-destroying error, and of establishing them in those great doctrines in the defence of which their forefathers suffered and died.

HISTORICAL TALES FOR YOUNG PROTESTANTS.

<h2>THE MERCHANT OF LYONS.</h2>
ABOUT seven hundred years ago, there lived at Lyons, in France, a wealthy merchant named Peter Waldo. His house was on a tongue of land which divides the two beautiful rivers—the Rhone and the Saone. The walls of the city, even at that period, were old and grey. It was by gloomy gateways that the traveller entered into close, narrow streets. Houses six or seven stories high, were ornamented with richly carved work in wood ; and
[10]
their over-hanging roofs almost touched at the projecting parts, casting deep shadows on the pathway below. The town had been long noted for its com merce ; and the quays,'and wharfs on both rivers presented a busy scene. The place had then, for more than five hundred years, been the chief seat of the silk trade of France. The clicking sound of the loom was heard in almost every house. Numerous trees had been planted without the city walls, on which silk worms were bred, whose cocoons yielded the means of industry and were the source of wealth to the people.
Peter Waldo had lived in great reputation as a merchant. Success had attended his labors, and he was known among his fellow-citizens as a man of honor, liberality and kindness of spirit. In the midst of his prosperity, an event took place, which led him to feel anxious for the salvation of his soul. He was sitting in the company of some friends. After supper, as they were engaged in pleasant con versation, one of them fell to the ground, and when he was raised it was found that he was dead ! From that time Waldo became a diligent inquirer after truth. He looked around, and saw the people carried away by sin, and then seeking to satisfy a guilty conscience with the false doctrines and vain ceremonies of the church of Rome. But in these peace was not to be found. The priests could not satisfy his mind as to the great question, How
[11]
shall man be just with God He knew he was a sinner; his conscience told him so. He knew he was not fit to die; and when he asked, "What must I do to be saved he was not satisfied with all the answers the priests of the church of Rome gave him. The Bible would have told him ; but Waldo had not the holy book. Rich as he was, he had not that best of all treasures : the few copies which then existed were in libraries to which the common people had not access. Besides, they were all written in Latin, so that a person had to be learn- ed in that tongue in order to read a Bible, provided he could by any means get sight of one.
Some books of piety soon afterwards fell into the hands of Peter Waldo, written by the " early fa- thers," as they are called—pious men, who lived after the apostles, and before the Christian religion was corrupted by the priests of Rome. In these books he found many passages from the New Testa- ment, and much that brought light and comfort to his soul. These parts only made him more anxious to secure the whole of the Bible.
After much labor, Peter Waldo was so happy as to own a copy of God's word. It must have been a large sum of money that he gave for it; yet what a treasure it proved to him ! He did not think the money misspent or the time misapplied that he gave to the study of it. These were nothing, in comparison with the blessed truths which it made
[12]
known to him. It taught him the "new and living
way', of approaching God, through Jesus Christ, the only Saviour and Mediator ; it told him that a
contrite and believing heart is what God requires
;
it was heart service that was the reasonable ser vice.', Before, he was perplexed and troubled ; now,
he was peaceful and glad. Peter Waldo felt like a new man; the burden was gone from his soul; light was there, and comfort, for he had found mercy
through faith in Christ Jesus. Waldo had been long known in the city for his kindness to all. He had freely given of his wealth
to relieve the wants of the people, but now, while he did not forget to give to those that needed, of the things that perish, he was more concerned that they should seek the bread of life for their souls. The Bible had taught him how he might be saved,
and he desired to tell others the good news. He
looked around, and beheld everybody groaning un der the heavy loads which the priests had put upon
them. He wept over their condition, and with a pious zeal he entered the houses of his friends and
fellow citizens that he might teach them about the
great and precious work of Christ Jesus. He told them that God required only repentance, faith in his Son, and holy lives. He begged them to come
to Jesus and have their sins washed away in his
blood. He held many meetings with the poor in
their cottages; he visited the sick and the dying;
[13]
he retired to the quiet of the country and the shel ter of the woods, that he might guide a few earnest seekers into the way of truth ; he taught them ; he
prayed with them ; and relieved their distresses. We need not wonder that the people loved him,
since he was concerned to feed both their bodies and
their souls.
tures might be translated into the language of the 2*
[14]
people. The translation then in use was the Vul gate, so called because it was to be for common,'
use in the churches. It was in the Latin tongue ; and though the languages of Europe had a mixture
of Latin words in them, they were still so unlike
it that the common, or vulgar people, (formerly the word vulgar was of the same sense as common)
could not read it, even if they had been permitted
to do so. What should we do without the Bible in our own
language ? The Bible in Latin would be a useless book to most of us; and yet it was just the plan of the priests of Rome to keep it in another tongue
that others might be ignorant of its sacred truths. "The people must have it in their own tongue,"
said Peter Vfaldo, and the work was soon begun.
It is not quite certain whether he translated it him self, or caused it to be done by others. Perhaps he
did a part of it, and engaged able persons to do the
rest.It was a very great labor; but having read the Bible himself, he spared neither money nor pains
that it might be placed in the hands of his country- men. At length, some of the books were completed,
and this was the Jirst translation of the Bible into a modern language. It was done by, or at the ex- pense of, a rich merchant. Did ever a man of wealth do a better work ? What a blessed gift it was to the people of that land !
[15]
When the Bible was finished, it could not be
largely circulated ; for this was before the art of printing was known. Written copies had to be made with the pen, demanding long and patient
labor; and when finished, a complete copy was
worth a large sum of money. The pious merchant,
however, had numerous copies of the New Testa- ment written, that they might be freely given to the people : and many had the privilege of reading
it in their own language. All honor to the brave and good man who thus gave the word of Grod to the men of France ! But this great service was not enough for Peter Waldo. He was not only the founder of a Bihle
SocietyJ but he began to form also a Missionary So ciety. Great numbers in the city had been brought,
through the teaching of the Holy Spirit, to love the
Saviour, and these he sent out, two by two, into all the region around. They carried their books with
them into other lands. Multitudes were led to a knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus, through
the humble efforts of these "poor men of Lyons,"
as they were called. These colporteurs, or book-hawkers, not only made
their way into the homes of the lowly, but found
access to the castles of the nobles. Their manner,
as we are told, was to carry a box of trinkets, or other goods, and travel about the country as pedlars.
When they entered the houses of the gentry, to sell
[16]
some of their wares, they cautiously made known
that they had other goods that were far more valu- able than these —precious jewels, which they would
show if they might be permitted to do so. They
would then bring them from their pack, or from
under their cloak, a Bible or Testament, and as they spoke of its worth, they urged that this holy
book might find a place in the homes and hearts of those who heard them. In this way many of the
nobles and gentry were brought to possess the word
of Grod. A poet has described one of these hawkers
displaying jewels and silks to view, and thus ad- dressing the lady of the castle : " 0 lady fair, I have yet a gem,
Whicli a purer lustre flings. Than the diamond flash of the jewel'd crown. On the lofty brow of kings. A wonderful pearl of exceeding price, Whose virtue shall not decay ; Whose light shall be as a guide to thee, And a blessing on thy way."
The lady glanced at the mirroring steel Where her form of grace was seen Where her eyes shone clear, and her dark locks waved
Their clasping pearls between
:
" Bring forth thy pearl of exceeding worth, Thou traveller grey and old ; And name the price of thy precious gem, And my pages shall count thy gold." The cloud went off from the pilgrim's brow, As a small and meagre book, Unchased with gold or diamond gem, From his folding robe he took ;
[17]
" Here, lady fair, is the pearl of price, May it prove as such to thee
!
Nay, keep thy gold—I ask it not, For the word of God is free." The hoary traveller went his way
But the gift he left behind Hath had its pure and perfect work On that high-horn maiden's mind ; And she hath turned from the pride of sin, To the lowliness of truth, And given her trustful heart to God
In its beautiful hour of youth. It was not to be supposed that the pope and the
priests looked quietly upon the labors of Peter Waldo
and his book-hawkers. The pope anathematized
him, or pronounced him accursed, and ordered the archbishop of Lyons to proceed against him with
the greatest rigor. The archbishop was very will- ing to obey. "If you teach any more/, said he to the merchant, "I will have you condemned as a
heretic and burnt." How can I be silent in a matter which concerns
the salvation of men he boldly answered. Offi- cers were sent to secure him, but they feared the
people, to whom Peter Waldo had become endear ed. During three years he was concealed by his. friends. At length the merchant could stay at Lyons no longer in safety. He fled from the city,
going from place to place, everywhere explaining
and teaching Bible truth; and God blessed his
labors.
[18]
Waldo and his missionaries were treated very badly by their enemies ; they were called sorcer- ers," cut-purses," and tur-lupins," or people
living with wolves. They had often nowhere to lay
their heads, and were forced to find refuge in the
forest. Poor men of Lyons'' became a term of reproach. It could be said of them, as of good men
in Bible times, " They wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth, be- ing destitute, afflicted, tormented and it may be
truly added, Of whom the world was not worthy." —Heb. xi. 37, 38. While burning at the stake,
they praised Grod for the privilege of laboring and
suffering for Him who had died on the cross for them. Thirty-five pious men and women were burned in one fire, and eighteen suffered martyr dom at another time. God's blessed truth, however, cannot be burned
out, or rooted out, or put out, by any way of men's
devising. Grod himself will take care of it. In
spite of the anger of their enemies, in all the coun tries whither Peter Waldo and his missionaries went,
the truth made its way, converting and comforting
many souls. Thus were planted the seeds, the little seeds, of true Bible religion, which, three or four hundred years afterwards, sprang up and aided in promoting the great Protestant Reformation—that Reformation which established Bible religion again on the earth, and gave a great blow to the power of the pope.
[19]
But what became of Peter Waldo ? After doing
much good, and presenting a noble example as a
Christian, he went into Bohemia, where he peace fully died, in the year 1179. From that time to
this present day his name is held in great respect
—
not merely or chiefly because he was a great mer chant or a rich man—but because he gave himself
and his all to the service of our Lord ; and because he was the first in Europe to give the word of Grod
to the common people in their own language.
Many of the followers of Peter Waldo, after long
and great trial, joined the Vaudois, or Waldenses*
a hardy and simple-minded people, who had never
submitted to the church of Rome. They were one
' in faith, and they were now willing to live together
as mutual helps in the gospel. Thus united, though
almost unknown to the world, they were, for ages,
like a little flock,,' dwelling alone in the lovely
and quiet valleys of Piedmont. It is true, that
persecutors, as fierce wolves, often broke upon the
fold to worry and destroy them ; but to the present
day "a remnant', has been left, who continue faith- ful to the truth. As we read of those who have formed a part of the church in other days, may we feel a concern to par- take of the same faith—that faith which savingly
*The Waldenses existed centuries before Waldo. The name Waldo
is taken either from a Latin word meaning one who lives in a dense
valley, that is, a dalesman ; or from a German word meaning one who
lives in a wood.
[20]
unites the soul to Christ, and which will keep it steadfast to his cause in a sinful world. Then in the kingdom of glory we shall meet with all those, from
every land, who passed through fiery trials on earth,
and who, having washed their robes, and made
them white in the blood of the lamb," shall stand
before the throne of God for ever. —Rev. vii. 14.
<h2>THE GOOD PARSON OF LUTTERWORTH.</h2>
In tlie reign of Edward the Third, a crowd of the
citizens of London were seen on their way to old
St. Paurs. As they hurried along the narrow
streets, and collected around the doors of the cathe dral, their loud voices and violent actions, showed
that they were engaged in angry debate. It was
evident that some unusual event had drawn them
from their homes so early on that winter,s morning.
A priest, named John Wycliffe, was about to ap- pear, to answer charges that had been brought
against him. As they gathered into clusters the accused arrived, dressed in a plain black robe, with
a small round cap on his head. His long grey beard spread over his breast. He looked calm, as though the tumult of the people awoke in him no
fear. Passing through the throng, he entered a small ancient chapel, which formed a part of the
cathedral, where a bishop and the judges had al- ready taken their seats. The accused was not
alone. Two noblemen, clothed in velvet and gold,
walked by his side. One of them, the Duke of Lancaster, placed himself on his left hand; the 3
[22]
other, Lord Pei'cj, stood on his right. When the popish judges saw the powerful friends who had come to support his cause, tliejL were filled with
rage; and charged the two noblemen with being ene- mies to their religion and the king. Provoked by
these words, the duke in return threatened the
bishop, and soon the whole assembly was in confu-
[23]
sion, John Wycliffe standing all tlie while before
his judges without speaking a word. When the people who were at the doors heard
the noise within, they cried aloud against the good
priest; then running through the streets to the pa lace of the Duke of Lancaster, the most beautiful mansion in the kingdom, they began to pull it down.
In their rage they committed murder on a person
that was passing near the spot. These ignorant people had been told by some de- signing priests that Wycliffe and his friends intend- ed to destroy the religion of the land, and in their ignorance they were driven to these acts of violence.
It was like the scene when the apostle Paul was at Ephesus; "and the whole city was filled with con fusion/, because the idol-makers, who feared they
should lose their gains, stirred up the people to op- pose the preaching of the gospel.
Nearly twelve months passed away, and Wycliffe once more stood in the same place, and before the same judges. There was again a great crowd of people ; but they were not then crying out against
him, and demanding that he should be sent to prison. Since the pious priest was last there they
had better understood his character, and had learn- ed to value his preaching. He was now known to them as the gospel doctor. The people had come to support his cause. They
forced their way before the court, and demanded
[24]
that he should not be hurt/, The priests were
alarmed at what they saw and heard ; and though
they had hoped to have condemned him, they were
glad to let him depart freely to his home.
Is it asked, What was the crime that brought
Wycliflfe into such trouble ? The answer is—The
pope of Rome had sent three letters, or bulls', as they were called, to England—one to the bishops, another to the university of Oxford, and a third to the king. In them he charged the humble parson with many serious offences ; and he desired that he
should be seized and sent to prison, there to lie until further orders from Rome. Was he, then, a teacher of false doctrine, a traitor, or in any other way a wicked and injurious man? No; his offence was, that he was an inquirer after truth, and sought
to bring the people from under the power of the monks and friars, who led them astray ; and it was
because he thus felt and acted that the pope had
resolved on his overthrow. There were at this time in England many thou sands of persons called monks and friars. The
monks were those who lived alone or separate from
other people ; their houses were called monasteries,
or places of retirement; the term friars signifies brothers." Of these latter were the begging
friars, who, it is said, swarmed throughout Eng land', at this time. They travelled over the land,
forcing their way into the houses of rich and poor,
[25]
living without any cost, and taking all the money
they could obtain. Though they assumed poverty,
they were not "poor in spirit nor were they "the meek of the earth. Like the Pharisees of old; they pretended to be better and holier than others,
though their lives were full of evil. They ,Haught
for doctrine the commandments of men," and de- clared that all who belonged to their order were
sure of salvation. When Wycliffe saw the conduct of the friars, his heart was much grieved. The best way to op- pose them he knew would be to write a book against
them ; and a book was written in which he called them, ,Hhe pests of society, the enemies of religion,
and the promoters of every crime.'' Angry and
annoyed at the exposure, they were ready to help the pope in the hope of getting the writer sentenced by the judges to the dungeon or to death. Wyc liffe, however, continued to write and preach against
them, and with so much labor and zeal that his health began to suffer. One day, lying on his bed,
and, as it was thought, nigh to his end, some of these friars made their way into his room. They
rushed to his couch, began to upbraid him for what
he had done, and called on him to express his sor- row before he died. For some time he heard them
in silence ; then, desiring his servants to raise him
up, he cried aloud, I shall not die but live, and
shall again declare the evil deeds of the friars.' 3*
[26]
Alarmed at his courage, tbey fled in haste from the room. When Wyclifife got well, he retired to the little market town in Leicestershire, of which he was the
priest. In this place he entered on his great work —that of translating the Bible into the English
language as it was then spoken. To give the peo ple the word of God was the best way of fulfilling his threat against the friars. He knew that the Bible was God's great gift to the whole human fam ily ; why, then, should not his countrymen possess
it ? To give it to them would be something worth
living for ; and so he diligently set about his task. It was a long and difficult work for one man to undertake ; but faith and love carried him through
it. The word of God was precious to his own soul
;
and he knew that what had been a blessing to him self could be made a blessing to thousands. So on- ward he went in his work, with prayer and patience
:
and as he went along, he found instruction and
comfort for himself, whilst he was providing for the
spiritual good of others. Year after year he saw the fruits of his study in- crease : one page and then another were done, un til, at length, in the year 1380, the last verse of the New Testament was translated, and the Bible com pleted in its English dress ! We may think we see him looking upon the pile of writing he had made,
then falling on his knees to give God thanks, im-
[27]
ploring him to bless the truth to the souls of the
people.* All books in those days were very scarce and
costly, for the art of printing was not then known.
Before the year 13 00, the library of the University
of Oxford consisted only of a few tracts, chained, or kept in chests, in the choir of St. Mary,s church. Copies of all books were made in writing; and as
this was a slow and careful work, it took several months for one person to write a complete Bible. How different is it now, when a printing machine
will produce fifteen to twenty copies of the Bible every hour, and thousands every year ! And then as to the cost. Richard of Bury,
Chancellor of England under Edward the Third,
spared no expense in collecting a library ; the first, perhaps, that any private man had formed. Yet
so scarce were valuable books, that he gave an ab- bey fifty pounds weight of silver for between thirty
and forty volumes ! The Book of Psalms, with
brief notes written in the margin, was valued at a sum equal to nearly forty dollars of our present
money. A copy of the New Testament was sold for thirteen dollars* a sum equal to six months' income
of a tradesman, for about twenty-five dollars were
considered enough to keep a farmer or trader in those times, when so few of the comforts we now
* Copies of the whole or separate books of Wyclifle's translation are
still found in public libraries. A perfect and beautiful specimen is to be seen in ihe British Museum.
[28]
enjoy were known. But costly as was the purchase,
it was cheerfully paid. And great as was the dan ger of those who dared to read the word of God,
there were some who bravely met it. Written copies of Wydiffers Bible were eagerly
sought after by those who could read. There, in a
castle, some rich nobleman might have been seen with one of these written Bibles before him, "in fair characters on vellum. If it had been the twenty-third Psalm on which his attention was fix- ed, it would have presented itself with the follow- ing peculiar spelling and Saxon letters :
—
pe title of pe xxiii. salm ey pe song of dauid. " pc lord gouernep me. , no ping schal fail to me : in pe place of pasture ye he hap set me. He
nurschide me on pe watir of refreischyng : he
conuertide my soule. He ledde me forp on pe papis
of ritzfulnesse : for his name. For whit pouz y
schal go in pe myddis of schadewe of deep: y schal not drede yuels. for pou art wip me. pi zerde and
pi stafi": po han coufortid me. pou hast maad redi aboord in my sizt: azens hem pat troblen me. pou
hast maad fat myn heed wip oyle : and my cuppe
pat fillep me is tul cleer. And pi merci schal sue me : in alle pe dales of my lyf. And pt y dwelle
in pe hows of pe lord : in to pe lengpe of daies/,
But though a nobleman might be found who
could read the Bible, yet from the want of learning,
as well as books being scarce and costly, there were
only a small number of the people who could pos-
[29]
sess the word of God. Even some of the nobles and gentry could not write their names; and not many of the common people were able to read. Perhaps not more than one in a small town or vil- lage was learned enough to read and write. We
may, then, suppose what was the state of the land when the people had no gospel preached to them,
and few possessed the Scriptures or could peruse any book likely to be the means of doing good to their souls. England, indeed, had been for ages without the light that cometh from heaven. Errors and foolish rites, like dark clouds, were spread
over the land.
It was at such a time that Wycliffe arose as a
light in the darkness; and, like the star that ap- peared over the fields of Bethlehem, he gaided many
souls to the Saviour. The numerous books he wrote were spread abroad in the same manner as his writ- ten Bible. He also prepared many sermons, about
three hundred of which have been preserved to the present day. From these we learn what were the
truths he taught the people.
The priests said that human merits and sufferings,
penance and pilgrimages, would certainly entitle them to heaven ; but Wycliffe taught that sinful man
could not save himself, and that mercy was only to be found through faith in the blood and righteous ness of Jesus Christ. The priests asserted that im ages should be honored, and that there were many
[30]
mediators ; but the bold reformer said that the wor ship of images was idolatry, and that saints and
angels were not to be prayed to, for " there is but
one Mediator between God and men/, He main tained that the church of Rome is no more the head
of the churches than any other church; and that the apostle Peter had no more power given him
than any other apostle; and for all his doctrines he referred to the Word of God, maintaining that it was the only safe guide to a Christian man. In many other ways he opposed the doings and teach- ings of the priests of the Papal church. Wycliffe did not quite receive all the great Bible
truths in all their fulness : it is a wonder that he
knew so much at a time when all the land was sunk
in ignorance and error. But he understood enough
of the word of God to know that many of the doc trines of the Romish church could not be found
there. And he preached so many of the true doc trines of the Bible as well to entitle him to the hon orable name, The Morning Star of the Refor mation.
The "good parson'' was much beloved in his own
parish; and many came from the villages around to his church, that they might hear the gospel from
his lips.* He was often seen, with a portion of his
* The carved oak pulpit in which he preached, the table on which
he wrote, the chair in which he died, and the velvet robe, nearly de- stroyed by time, which he wore, are still preserved in the vestry of Lutterworth church.
[31]
LUTTERWORTH CHURCH. written Bible under his arm, and staff in hand,
visiting from house to house. The mansions of the
gentry, the dwellings of the farmers, and the cot- tages of the field-laborers, were favored alike with
his pastoral visits. He was the friend of all; he was ready to teach and comfort and pray for all at
all times. Thus he lived, seeking the good of souls, his enemies opposing him even to the end of his days, though God did not permit them to cast him
into prison, nor to bring him to a cruel death, as they desired. Continued labor at length broke down his health.
[32]
One day, when in ehurcli, he was seized with a
fatal attack of disease, and sunk to the ground. He
was carried into his house, where he lay in a speech less state for two days, and then died. But though
he was removed, he left behind him many disciples,
who carried on the good work which he had so well begun.
Though Wycliffe never left his own land, to preach the truth across the seas, it was carried into almost every country of Europe by his writings.
His tracts and sermons were read by many awaken ed minds, and were the means of preparing them
for a full knowledge of the gospel.
As his enemies could not prevail against him
while he lived, they showed their hatred of his name and doctrine after his death. When his re- mains had lain in the grave for forty one years, they were dug up and burned, and the ashes cast into the little river Swift, which flows near the town
where he labored. Thence, as an old writer says, they passed into the great river Severn, then in their onward course into the narrow seas, and at
last into the wide ocean ; and thus became the em blem of the truth, which should flow from the little country town over England and the world. That
it shall extend from the river to the ends of the
earth," we know, for the word of God declares it. In this simple tale we see through what struggles
and dangers some have passed for the gospeFs sake.
[33]
The practical lesson we are taught is, to be at all times decided for the truth. By being decided, we
do not mean to be noisy, or forward, or stubborn. One of the fruits of the Spirit is gentleness, which
consists with the greatest firmness and decision in that which is right. We must in meekness instruct those that oppose the word of Grod. 2 Tim. ii. 25. Whilst we are valiant for the truth upon the
earth," we are to speak that truth in love. Jer. ix. 3 ; Eph. iv. 15. Be decided, then, for God's word
in opposition to all error. Let us be thankful for those whom God has raised up as examples of holy decision. They labored,
and we enjoy the benefit of their labors. They
planted a little sapling which took root, and has become a great tree, under whose boughs we now
sit in peace. It was through God's grace working
in them that we now possess a free and full Bible. Let us, then, give heed to the truths it contains,
and yield our hearts to the gracious Saviour it makes known.
4
<h2>THE BOHEMIAN WITNESS.</h2>
In the country that once formed the kingdom of Bohemia is a wide district known as the Black For est. Its northern parts consist of lofty mountains,
whose rough ridges and peaks tower aloft to the height of five thousand feet. Some of these moun tain tops are bleak and barren, and during a great
part of the year are covered with snow, which re flects a variety of colors as the frequent changes of
light and shade of the sky pass over them. Others
are covered with thick woods and forests of pine
trees, presenting a bold, wild, and beautiful scene
to the eye of the traveller. Ruins of castles, the homes of the nobles of former ages, still stand on many of these heights. In the southern portion of this range, the forest has been long since cleared by the hand of man. On
their lovely slopes are pasture grounds and corn fields, orchards and vineyards, with cultivated farms here and there. Rivulets and lakes formed
by the waters which flow from the mountains re- fresh the cultivated parts below.
It is now more than four hundred years since a
[35]
people sought a refuge in the caves and solitudes of
the Black Forest. They were the Waldenses, of whom we heard in a former story. Among these
disciples of Christ the devoted Peter Waldo found
a home and a grave. And it was in one of their humble villages that John Huss, the Bohemian wit- ness for the truthJ was born. As a witness he bore testimony to the truth at the expense of his life. His history is full of interest. Let us dwell upon
it for a short time. John Huss was the son of poor parents, who
managed to send him to a public school. As they
could not afford to pay any money, the boy acted as servant to one of the masters, who in return kindly
lent him books, and helped to advance him in his
learning. He was a diligent student, and as he
grew up he rose from one step to another, till at length, when only twenty-four years of age, he was made the professor of divinity in the college of Prague. This was a high post for so young a man. At this time he was a Papist : but a nobleman placed
in his hands some of the writings of Wycliffe, and
advised him to read them. At first he thought them
bold and full of danger ; but the more he studied them, the more he saw that they agreed with the word of God. They led him to the Scriptures, where
he found many things different from the teachings
of the church of Rome.
One day the archbishop of Prague ordered all the
[36]
writings of Wjcliffe that could be found in the dis trict of the Black Forest to be collected, and burn ed in the court of his palace. This was done amidst
the mockery and songs of the people, who knew that the archbishop was an ignorant man, and sought to burn what he could not refute. In one of their songs they thus derided him : " He to the fire their books consigns, Of which he cannot read two lines," Huss spoke openly against the conduct of the arch- bishop, which led the priests to accuse him to the
pope. A summons came for him to appear at Rome;
but knowing that he could not safely go in person, he sent a friend thither to defend him. The latter was cast into prison, while Huss was declared to be
a heretic. The pope, also, put every place in which
he might dwell under an interdict or a curse. But
Huss was not to be easily silenced, and he went on
to spread the doctrines he had learned from Wycliffe,
adding, however, as such witnesses for the truth always have done, that he was ready to give up his opinions if it could be proved from the Scriptures
that he was in error. It was in the year 1412 that he made his boldest
attack. The sellers of papal indulgences came to the city of Prague. They undertook to sell pardons
of sin for money—a shocking delusion, which Huss
exposed with great courage. On hearing of his op position, the pope ordered all public worship to
[37]
cease so long as the Reformer continued in the city of Prague.
Huss now judged it best to leave the place. But
he could not refrain from witnessing against the
evils of the times ; and, shut out from the city, ho
preached in towns and villages, in the fields, and in the forest, and with such power and success, that, as it commonly happens in such cases, the rage of
his enemies helped to the spread of the gospel.
The disorders in the church of Rome grew worse. There were three persons who strove for the office of pope. The three claimed to be infallible ; each
asserted that he could not in any case act wrongly,
and at the same time he cursed his rivals. Indeed,
the whole church was like a diseased body. The
words of the prophet could truly be applied to it
;
"The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head there
is no soundness in it ; but wounds, and bruises,
and putrifying sores : they have not been closed, neither bound up, nor mollified with ointment., , Isaiah i. 5, 6. It was now acknowledged by all parties that something must be done to put an end to such a
disgraceful state of afi'airs. Accordingly, in 1414,
a council was summoned by the emperor to meet at Constance As the day of meeting drew nigh,
there had assembled one of the popes, Sigis mund emperor of G-ermany, thirty-four cardinals,
4*
[38]
twenty archbishops, one hundred and sixty bishops, two hundred and fifty abbots, four princes, twenty
dukes, eighty counts, and more than seven hundred
knights and other persons of rank. They had come
from almost every known country in the world,
and were persons of the greatest note in their age. At the opening of this famous council it was soon found that the pope and emperor were rivals to each
other. The Bible teaches us to love one another
;
and that ,Hhe fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-sufiFering, gentleness, and meekness.,' But
between these two great ones of the earth there was
a deadly hatred. The emperor was crafty and de ceitful, and the pope was known to be one of the most openly wicked men of his times. Such were
the leaders who were to settle the affairs of the church and the world
!
Before this council John Huss was called to ap pear. He well knew the power of his enemies, and
that when once in their hands they would not
allow him to escape. He therefore did not obey
the summons until the emperor gave him a mfv
conduct that is, a written promise, which was to be a pledge that he should go and return without
injury. We shall see how this promise was kept.
When Huss took leave of his friends, before he
departed on his journey, he thus spoke to them:
You know that I have taught you no error : con tinue in the truth, and trust in the mercy of God.
[39]
Beware of false teachers. I am going to this great
assembly, where the Lord will give me grace to en- dure trials, imprisonment, and, if it be his will, even
the most dreadful death. Whatever happens, our joy will be great when we meet in the everlasting
mansions/, As he went up to the council, the people of the towns and villages through which he
passed came in crowds to meet him ; and in every
place a loving welcome was given to him.
When he arrived at Constance, he sent a message
to the pope that he was ready to meet all charges
laid against him, saying, that as he had received a mfe conduct from the emperor, he hoped the head
of the church would also grant him his protection.
The answer to this request was soon given ; he was
seized, and cast into a dark and filthy dungeon by
the side of a river, under the wicked pretence that no faith was to be kept with heretics.,' After he
had been examined by the council, he was removed
to a castle, where, in the day-time he was secured with chains in the vaults of his prison house ; and
at night was fastened by a padlock to a wall. In
this sad state he lay for six months.
Huss was not unprepared for this persecution ; he
had made up his mind to suffer for Christ's sake. But in the midst of all his trouble and bondage he
found light and comfort from the presence of his Saviour. His accusers tried to raise an uproar, and
poured upon him every kind of reproach. They
[40]
said that he should be burned if he did not yield to the popOj and renounce the doctrines.he had preach ed. His only answer was, " Grod will not permit me to deny his truth/, After some time had passed, John Huss, on his forty-third birthday, stood once more before the
council, which had now been sitting for many
months. The emperor had come in great state, with
his crown on his head, and his sceptre carried before
him. Around him stood his princes and nobles. The cardinals, bishops, and others, too, were there
to pronounce the sentence of death on the poor
[41]
prisoner. They placed him on a high stage or plat form, that he might be seen by the whole assembly,
and a band of soldiers stood around him. The good man felt his position to be one of great peril ; and
though there was no one to stand up for his cause, he knew that his God and Saviour was nigh to hear and help him. Falling on his knees, he prayed for grace that he might be faithful to the end. After
his enemies had accused him of heresy, sentence was passed upon him that he should be publicly burned. His only answer was a prayer. 0 Lord
God/, he cried, " I beseech thee, for thy mercy's
sake, to pardon all my enemies ; for thou knowest
that I have been falsely accused, and unjustly con- demned. But do thou forgive them this sin.'', Again his enemies loudly accused him, calling him
by the name of Judas, and in other ways casting
reproach upon him. To which he meekly replied, I place all my confidence and hope in God my
Saviour. I know he will never take from me the cup of salvation, but that by his grace I shall drink
it to-day in his kingdom.,'
The hearts of these nobles and clergy were closed against all pity for their helpless prisoner. They
derided him, placing on his head a paper crown, about two feet high, on which were painted three
devils, and in large letters the word, Arch-heretic.,' On seeing it, Huss calmly said, My Lord Jesus
bore for me, a poor sinner, a painful crown of thorns.
[42]
and died the shameful death of the cross. There fore, for his sake, I will cheerfully bear this lighter crown. "Now we deliver up your soul to Satan,
and to hell/, cried the bishops. But I/, added
Huss, commit my soul to my gracious Lord, Jesus
Christ." In this manner he was, without any delay, led out to the place of execution, in a meadow in the midst of the gardens outside of the city. Eight
hundred soldiers guarded him : a mighty host, in- deed, to take charge of a poor unarmed man ! The
crowd of people was so great, that they were obliged
to shut the gates of the city, and only to let them
out by companies, lest the bridge over which they
passed should break down under them.
The behavior of Huss, on his way to the place of his death, was calm and even joyful. As he
passed the archbishop's palace, seeing his enemies
burning his books in the great square, he smiled at their vain display of malice. On going a little further, he cried out, 0 Jesus Christ, Son of the
living God, have pity upon me;" and he continued
to utter similar petitions till he came to the place of execution. The people who listened to him said, " We know not what this man has taught and
preached before, but we hear nothing from him now
but holy words and Christian prayers.',
When he arrived at the spot where he must die, he fell on his knees, lifting up his eyes to heaven,
[43]
and praying aloud, in language taken from the 31st and 51st Psalms, repeating very solemnly this verse
:
Into thine hand I commit my spirit : thou hast redeemed me, 0 Lord God of truth/, After a brief pause Huss begun to pray again : "Lord Jesus, I
cheerfully suffer this terrible and cruel death, for the sake of thy holy gospel, and the preaching of thy sacred word : do thou forgive my enemies the crime they are committing/, On this the execu tioners made him cease, and compelled him to walk
three times rt)und the pile of wood. He then asked
that he might speak to his jailers : and when they were come, he said, "I thank you most sincerely for
all the kindness you have shown me, for you have
behaved to me more as brethren than as keepers.
Know, also, that my trust in my Saviour is un shaken, for whose sake I willingly suffer this death,
being assured I shall be with him this day in Paradise. The executioners then took him, and bound him
to a stake with wet ropes. They fixed round his neck a black rusty chain, on which he said, smiling.
My dear Master and Saviour was bound for my
sake with a harder and heavier chain than this. Why should I, a poor sinful man, be ashamed of thus being bound for his sake?" The wood was
put in order, and some bundles of light furze were
placed under his feet, with heaps of straw and large
wood around him up to his neck. The pile was then
[44]
lighted, and the flames began to wrap round the body
of the martyr. At that moment, the voice of singing was heard. It was poor Huss in the midst of his pains praising Grod. Then several times the cry came from the midst of the fire, " 0 Christ, Son of
Grod, have mercy on me." But the wind soon drove
the flames into his face, and stopped his voice;
still, however, his head and his lips were seen to move, as if in prayer, for a short time, when the Lord ended the sufierings of his faithful servant
;
his body fell into the flames, life was gone, and his soul entered on its eternal rest. The ashes of Huss were put into a cart, with the
earth on which he had been executed, and the whole thrown into the Rhine, which flowed near, that not a trace of this holy witness for the truth might be left. But, as an elegy composed at this time says ; His ashes will be scattered over every country : no river, no banks will be able to retain them ) and those whom the enemy thought to silence by death, thus sing and publish, in every place, that gospel, which his persecutors thought to suppress. Whilst we shudder at the wickedness of men, as we read this account, let us ever keep in mind that God, who is infinite in wisdom, overlooks and con trols all events. He guides and directs with an un seen hand all human afiairs, and makes all things
fulfil his gracious purpose. Out of persecutions
[45]
and trials he has ever made good to come. The
lighting the fires of the martyrs was one of the means of dispersing the darkness of the middle
ages y and the courage of these servants of God in the midst of suffering, led the people to inquire
after the truth of those principles for which they
died.
<h2>THE MONK THAT SHOOK THE WORLD.</h2>
In the year 1497 two boys were seen passing
through a small city in Germany. They walked
slowly, and at times stopped before the doors of the houses, and sung carols about the infant Jesus. It was Christmas time, and the weather was cold and
frosty. The evening was drawing on ; and the
bright glare of the fires within the houses of that
old city of Eisenach shone forth through the small windows on the hoar frost without. These poor lads belonged to a school kept by
some monks, who gave their pupils quite as many
blows and angry words as lessons of learning. As
was the custom of the times, they had been sent to beg their bread from street to street, singing as they went along. The better to move the heart
to charity they sang of Him whose lowly birth was
at that seasoii of the year called to mind.
That day these minstrel boys had met with only frowns and repulses ; and they thought of returning,
cold and hungry as they were to their home. But
there was the house of Conrad Cotta nigh at hand. He was the burgomaster, or chief magistrate, of the
[47]
city : perhaps, if they sang before his door they
might get some help, for his wife Ursula was well known for deeds of kindness. It was their last hope, and so they sang their carol in their sweetest
style. Ursula was very fond of music; and, hearing
the sounds, she stood at the window till the song was finished. The singing of one boy was more
musical than the other. It was the voice of young
Martin Luther which fixed her attention. She had
often listened to it with delight before in the great
church of the city, and now, as she gazed on his
pale, intelligent face, she felt the deepest pity. A
gentle, loving heart had Ursula Cotta. She had
seen the boys driven from three doors, but there awaited them kind words and charity at her dwell ing. When the carol was ended, she made signs
for them to approach. It was not often that they were spoken to in such a gentle manner; and when
she asked Martin from whence he came, and what was his father's name, how great was her delight to find that he was a kinsman of her husband
!
The boys were soon placed before a cheerful
fire ; and after a good supper they were ready to sing to good Ursula their most favorite carol. When
that was ended, young Martin sang the forty-sixth
Psalm. From that day, Martin became a frequent
visitor at her house. She was as a second mother
to him; and often did he seek to repay her kindness
[48]
by one of his sweetest songs, or by a few strains on
his flute. Five years had passed away, and Martin had be- come a student in a college. He had met with
many kind friends ; and his father too (who had
been a poor woodcutter) by this time was able to
assist him with money. This was a great comfort
to the young man ; he could now pursue his studies with better hope of success. In the college there was a large room, where he spent every moment he
could spare. This room was the library, from the
shelves of which he took down book after book, and
read them with profit and delight. But there was
one large heavy volume he had never yet opened.
At length he took it from its place, and found it was a Bible printed in the Latin language. He
was now nearly twenty years of age, and had been
brought up almost all his life in schools and colleges,
and this was the first time he had met with the Holy
Scriptures. It is true, he had been told there was
a book called the Bible, but he had never seen a copy of it. With feelings of surprise and interest he turned over the leaves. He had not expected to
findr it so large a volume ; and there were writers in
it whose names or works he had never heard of. Beginning at the first page, he read on till he came
to the history of Hannah and the child-prophet
Samuel. It was to him all new and beautiful, and
full of instruction. As he left the library that night,
[49]
he said to himself, Oh that God would give me
such a book for my own V' That old Bible became
to him more precious than gold, and sweeter than honey to his taste. He turned over its pages with
constant pleasure, as often as he could run into the
library for a few hours. Little did he then think
that his hands would give that holy volume, trans- lated by himself into German, to millions of his countrymen, and to be a blessing for hundreds of years after he was laid in the grave. Three more years passed, and Martin Luther be- came a monk in another convent. The Bible he
had read in the college library had aroused serious thoughts in his mind ; but like the Ethiopian trea- surer, in the eighth chapter of the Acts, he needed
that " some man should guide', him to understand
the Scriptures. He was looking to his prayers and
fastings as the sure way of gaining heaven. He saw
not that a sinner can only be saved through faith in Christ Jesus. He knew not clearly of the love
of God. Every time he heard his holy name, he was pale with terror. The knowledge of God in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and of the grace of the Saviour, were to him hidden truths. His trust was more in saints and angels, in human
merits and tears of penitence, than in the glorious
work of the one Mediator. The monks with whom Martin lived were more
ignorant than himself; he could not therefore be
5*
[50]
taught by them ; besides, they cared more about his doing the work of a servant, that they might live at ease. They made him attend the gates, sweep
the church, and clean the rooms. And, as soon as the young monk had fiijished this labor, they would
say to him, " Go with your bag through the town
that is, in search of food for the convent. When
they found him at his books, they cried aloud,
Come, come; it is not by study, but by begging
corn, eggs, fish, and money, that you benefit the
cloister.', Poor Martin found that by entering a convent he had changed his garments, but not his
heart. He found no peace there. " Oh,,' he said, what will deliver me from my sins, and make me
holy ! How shall I satisfy the justice of God ? How shall I appear before him He almost pined
away from sorrow of heart. God was thus trying
him with small trials that he might the better here after bear great ones. After Martin had been some time in this convent he again met with a copy of that precious book
which formerly so astonished and delighted him
when a student, but it was chained. He could, not
take it to his sleeping cell to read, nor remove it from its place, so he sat by it every time he could
secretly get to the room where it was fixed. Some times he learned by heart long passages from that chained Bible, to repeat to himself when in his cell at night. The more he read, the more light came
[51]
into his mind. He began to see the evil of sin, the wickedness of his own heart, and more than all, the
rich grace and love of Jesus. He also began to detect the follies and corruptions of the church of Rome.
Two events, at this time, led his mind in the
further search after the truth. x\s he sat in the company of some friends, one of them was suddenly
killed. He then said to himself, What would be-
[52]
come of me, if I were thus suddenly called away?',
On his return from a visit to his father, the clouds covered the sky with blackness, and a violent thunderstorm broke over his head. As he hastened
along the road to find a shelter, the lightning
struck the ground near to his feet. He was startled and alarmed, but was unhurt. Stopping on his journey, he fell on his knees, and prayed to God to save him. When he arose, he said, I must be- come holy.'' But he knew not of the work of the Holy Spirit on the heart, leading to a life of faith and holiness. Whatever Martin Luther did to find peace was
still in vain. Those who saw his conduct said he was a devout man ; but he replied, " I am a great sinner : how is it possible for me to satisfy Divine
justice?'' Salvation could not be in himself; " how then," he thought, " can I obtain it !" But
the light of day was now dawning on the darkness
of his mind. The Holy Spirit was convincing him of
sin, and bringing him to feel his need of a Saviour. About this time there came to the convent an
old man named Staupitz. He saw how ill the poor young man looked ; and he asked, " Why are you
so sad, brother Martin ?" " Ah," said Luther, " I do not know what will become of me; it is in vain I make promises to God —sin is ever the strongest."
Oh, my friend," said Staupitz, calhng to mind
[53]
how he had felt, instead of torturing yourself on
account of your sins, cast yourself by faith into the Reedemer's arms—look at the wounds of Jesus
Christ,—to the blood that he has shed for you. God
is not angry with you, it is you who are angry with
God. Listen to the Son of God; he became man to give you the promise of Divine favor. By his
stripes are you healed ; by his blood are your sins cleansed away. Love him who first loved you; and
in order that you may be filled with the love of what is good, you must first be filled with love for God." What good words—what light and peace
did they afi'ord ! Luther listened for his life. There was one part of the Bible he now studied with great diligence and interest. It was the Epistle
of Paul to the Romans. A nd in that he saw clearly the way in which God could be just and the justi fier of the ungodly. From that time he found
peace in believing." Then he was filled with
love, and sought to obey God, not from fear, nor
with the hope of getting to heaven through his own
merits, but from the love which he felt as a child of God to his heavenly Father. Years rolled on, and Luther became a preacher, the head of a college, and a doctor of divinity. As
his influence became great, and still more great, he
made known to others the truths he had found so precious to his own soul. He boldly exposed the
vain teachings of the priests, their craft and evil
[54]
conduct. The fame of his labors soon spread in the
land, and many came to hear the gospel from his
lips. In the churches, the college halls, and the open air, he set forth the only way in which a sin- ner can be saved. In one of his preaching tours, Luther came to a city in which his early friends Conrad and Ursula
Cotta had found a home. They had by this time
lost nearly all their property ; the once rich burgo- master was now a poor man, and the troubles of
life had filled his heart with sorrow. He had been
told that a great preacher was on his way to the
city. They tell me," said Conrad to his wife, " that he talks bravely of free grace—that pardon
for sin is to be had without money and without
price. " That would just do for us,', replied
Ursula; "et us go to the church and hear him.'' The old church that day was well filled, for nobles and merchants, working men and maidens,
had come to listen to the bold preacher. Among
them sat Conrad and Ursula. Strange thoughts and
feelings must have moved them as they listened to the powerful voice of the monk. But when they heard him give out a psalm to be sung—his favor ite forty-sixth psalm
—
" God is our refuge," they called to mind that Christmas evening when
the minstrel boy of Eisenach sang it by their own
fireside.
[55]
The words that were preached sank deep into the
heart of Ursula, and from that hour she was brought
to know the only way in which she could be saved. Nor was this all ; for Martin Luther was now in a
condition to show his gratitude, and repay the kind ness of those who, in the days of his youth, took in to their house a poor friendless boy.
The time at last came when Luther was called forth openly to enter on the blessed Reformation.
The occasion was the opening of a great market
by the church of Rome. Crowds of anxious buy ers : men and women, rich and poor, old and young,
flocked there to spend their money. The dealers were monks, who smiled and joked as they offered
to sell their goods at the cheapest rate. But what
was it they had to sell ? It was, they said, the sal- vation of the soul! These dealers passed through
the country in a gay carriage; three horsemen rode by their side, and servants went before them to make known their approach. As they came near
to a town, the magistrates, priests, nuns, and the
trades, went forth to welcome them with music,
flags, and lighted tapers, amidst the ringing of bells and the shoutings of the people. We may suppose we see them as they reach the market-place. The
three monks seat themselves at a table, and raise a red flag, having on it the pope,s coat of arms. Be fore them is a money-chest ; and now one of them
named Tetzel, begins the sale. Come near," he
[56]
cries aloud, and I will give you indulgences—let- ters duly sealed, by wliich even the sins you here after commit shall be all forgiven you : even repent- ance is not necessary. But more than this; these
letters will not only save the living, but also the
dead. The very moment the money chinks against the bottom of the chest, the soul escapes from pur gatory, * and flies to heaven. Bring your money
;
bring money; bring money/,f The whole account
of this shameful and wicked imposture is almost too shocking for belief. There was one whose spirit was roused, and who
preached and wrote against Tetzel and his traffic. It was Martin Luther, the monk, who was now pre- pared for the contest which he saw before him.
Though he almost stood alone, he resolved, with
God's help, to witness to the truth and expose false- hood. He more than ever attacked the errors of the church of Rome. And what v/as better still, he
clearly and boldly declared the two great Protestant
doctrines—that the Bible, the whole Bible, and
nothing but the Bible, is the rule of our faith ; and
that a man can be justified—pardoned and accepted
of Grod—only by believing in and trusting in the
* Purgatory is said by Roman Catholics to be a place of punishment, where souls are purged, or cleansed by fire, from sin. But this is a vain and wicked deceit : Scripture does not teach us anything about such a
place : it tells us that " the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth," or purgeth,
" from all sin ;" and this is enough ; there is no need of a purgatory. fMerle d'Aubigne's History of the Reformation
[57]
atonement and righteousness of our Lord Jesus
Christ. His success among the people filled his enemies with rage. Tetzel sought to frighten the people by ordering
a large fire to be lighted in the principal square of the city, declaring that he had orders from the pope to imprison or burn all those who dared to op- pose the sale of indulgences. Only wait," said the priests, a fortnight, or at most a month, and
that heretic, Luther, will be burned alive.'' But
God did not let him fall into their power. The preaching of Luther soon found favor with
princes, nobles, learned doctors, and students, as well as large numbers of the common people. As
the priests could not put him down, the pope wrote
against him "2i bull', —or a decree by which he was
given over to persecution in this world and eternal death in the next. Ofi&cers were sent to burn his writings, and to publish the bull in the town where
Luther lived. But the reformer was not less bold than the pope. Placing himself at the head of a crowd of doctors, students, and friends, he went to the market-place. A fire was lighted, and, as the
flames arose, he cast into them a copy of the laws
of the Romish church, and the pope's bull. The
spectators were filled with joy, for they had long
felt the harsh and cruel power of these laws. When
all was burned to ashes, Luther quietly walked
to his home. By this act he made known to 6
[58]
the world that he had for ever separated from the
pope.
LUTHER BURNING THE POPE'S BULL. Luther was now summoned to appear before a diet, an assembly of princes, nobles, cardinals and bishops,
in the city of Worms, to answer all charges that might be brought against him. "Do not go,,' said
his friends ; your enemies will seize your person, and cast you into prison. " Christ liveth,', replied
Luther; "and I will go to Worms, in spite of all the powers of darkness. Besides, a safe conduct is provided me.'' But,'' urged his friends, was
not a royal letter, with a promise of safe conduct
[59]
given to John Huss, and yet he was betrayed and
burned/, Luther then concluded the debate by
saying, ',1 must make a confession of the truth be fore the diet. I will go, trusting in Christ. I am
bound to stand up in defence of his gospel.', And
he went, and before the princes and priests made a bold and brave confession of the truth. Finding they could not prevail, they commanded
him to depart at once from the town ; but his friends learned that there was a plot laid to arrest him on
the road, though a safe conduct had been given to him. Luther obeyed, and went forth; but as he came near to a forest, five armed men suddenly
opened the door of the carriage in which he rode,
pulled him out, placed him on a horse, and riding
through the forest, came at length to the castle of Wartburg. But this was a friendly capture. It was a plan to save him from the craft and cruelty of his ever-watchful foes. In the castle of Wart-
'burg, which he called his Patmos—his place of ex ile—he lived for ten months. He, however, though
alone, was not idle here. He spent his time in writing books and tracts, and translating the New
Testament into German.
Once more Luther came forth to carry on the work of God in public ; and in spite of the rage of
his enemies, and the threats of the pope, the empe ror, and the diet, he openly exposed the errors of
the church of Rome and called on all men to come
[60]
CASTLE OF WARTBURG.
out from her, that they might not partake of her
sins.The writings of Luther were now spread far and
wide. Three presses were fully at work in printing
them. His books passed from hand to hand ; they were carried into quiet valleys, and over some of the
[61]
highest mountains. They were read in the palaces of princes, in places of learning, and in the homes
of the poor. Ships carried them over wide seas, and
they were reprinted in Switzerland, France, Eng land, and other lands, until thousands of people were made to rejoice in the good news of salvation.
It is said that within the space of little more than
four years after publication a traveller purchased some of his works in the far-distant city of Jerusalem ! Even little children shared his love and labors. For them he wrote many sweet little hymns, which
are still sung, like the Divine Songs of the good Dr. Watts, in our land, by thousands of the young in Germany. Popery then received a check which it has never recovered, and a wound from the sword
of God's word of which it must die. Who can tell the full results of the labors of that bold and ear- nest man
—
** The solitary monk that shook the world From Pagan slumber, when the gospel trump, Thundered its challenge from a dauntless lip In peals of truth ?" There is a lesson, among many others, we may
learn from the history of Luther. It is, that we may have much religious knowledge, and yet not know Christ as the Saviour of sinners. Even those
in our days who have had the Bible from their ear liest youth, may yet be strangers to its blessed truths. 6*
[62]
They may "go about to establish their own right eousness thinking that they can become entitled
to heaven by their own worthiness. They understand
not the great doctrine which Luther after a long
struggle was led to receive, and which is revealed
in the word of Grod : Salvation—Salvation by
Christ—and Salvation by Christ alone ; for, Neither is there salvation in any other : for there
is none other name under heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved." Acts iv. 12.
Have you, dear young reader, felt the evil and
burden of sin ? Do you look by faith to Jesus Christ
that you may be saved ? Are you willing to profess
his name, and labor in his cause, even though you
may suffer reproach and shame for his sake ? Happy
are they who in the morning of their days yield
their hearts to the truth as it is in Jesus.*
* An original Life of Luther, written by the Rev. Dr. Sears for the American Sunday-school Union, will be found one of the most inter- esting and instructive volumes extant. It is enriched by a large number of beautiful engravings, and the initial letter of each chapter, and indeed all the pictorial embellishments are illustrative of some
subject connected with the biography. The work was republished by
the Religious Tract Society of London.
<h2>THE YOUTHFUL MARTYR.</h2>
In the days of the young king, Edward the Sixth, a Bible was placed on a desk in every church of the
land, for the use of the people. A copy in large
print, bound in wooden boards, with curious iron
clasps, was then seen fastened by a chain to a strong
upright stand. As " the word of God was precious
in those days''—for it was costly and scarce, and
many truly loved it—those who had a small share
of learning read it aloud to those who had less abil- ity than themselves. Thus light began to spread,
when a dark cloud came over this hopeful state of
things; for queen Mary, astern papist, ascended the throne of England, and quickly ordered the removal
of the Bibles. In a few places, however, her com- mands were either not received or were not obeyed.
Whatever was the cause, it is certain that there still lay the old Bible on a stand just inside the porch
of the little chapelry at Brentwood, in Essex,
England.
It was in the spring of the year 1555, that a
youth, named William Hunter, entered the church
to read the book he loved. He was an apprentice
[64]
to a London weaver, but was now on a visit to his native town. The lad was one of those who were
faithful to the truth, and who would rather suffer for it, than sin against it. As he stood reading the holy book, and lifting up his heart in prayer, a man
of the name of Atwell, a summoner or officer of the popish bishop, came that way, and saw him so engaged. " Why meddlest thou with the Bible V said the
officer, not a little angry that a boy should dare to open the Book of God. Knowest thou how to read ? And canst thou expound the Scriptures
The youth modestly replied, Father Atwell, I take not upon me to expound the Scriptures; but
finding the Bible here, I read it for my comfort.,' The officer then began to speak scornfully of the sacred word as a hurtful book. Say not so,,' said William, in a kind and re- spectful manner, "it is God's book, out of which
every one that hath grace may learn to know what
pleaseth God, and what is displeasing to him.', Could we not tell formerly,' ' inquired Atwell,
as well as now, how God was to be served Not so well as now,'' added William, "if we
might have his blessed word among us still, as we
have had ; and I pray God that we may have the
blessed Bible among us continually."
As Atwell could not prevail with the lad, he
cried, "I see you are one who dislikes the queen's
[65]
laws. I have heard how you* left London on that account ; but if you do not turn, you, as well as many other heretics, will broil for your opinions. " God give me grace," meekly replied William,
that I may believe his word, and confess his name,
whatever may come of it." Confess his name shouted old AtwelL "No,
no, you will go to the devil, all of you.,'
Atwell quickly left the chapel, and meeting a
priest, returned with him to where William was
reading, when the priest began to upbraid and
threaten him. The youth well knew what this meant, so he hastened to his father's house, and
taking a hasty leave of his parents fled from the town. It was a sad time when the young who loved
the Lord had to leave the homes of their early days,
and seek their dwelling and food wherever they
could find them.
A few days after William had gone, a justice sent for the father, and ordered him to produce his
son. "What, sir,'' said the parent, would you
have me seek my son, that he may be burned
The justice was resolute ; and upon this errand the poor father was obliged to depart. He rode about
for two or three days, hoping to satisfy the justice without finding his son. The lad, however, saw
his father at a distance, and went to meet him. On
learning the danger of his parent he said he would
return, rather than place his father in any peril.
[66]
And yet how could the aged parent secure his own
safety by the surrender of his child? It was a
struggle of affection : at length he yielded, and they
went together into the town. When the evening drew on, William and his father ascended the hill that leads to the little town
of Brentwood. The cottagers bade them good cheer
as they passed them on their way ; but it was with
heavy hearts and weeping eyes that they looked for- ward to the coming morrow. They had not, how ever, to wait till the morning dawn, for during the night the young Christian was seized, and hurried
to the stocks. There he lay, till break of day, pained
in body, but happy in mind.
Early in the morning, William was taken before
a justice of the peace, who, after trying in vain to shake his faith, ordered him to be carried to the
old palace in the fields of Bethnal Green—about
sixteen miles away—where Bonner, the popish
bishop of London, then resided. When he stood in the hall of the palace, the bishop first spoke to him
gently, then sternly, and then roughly ; but still the youth would not promise to give up the Bible, and
deny its truths. " Away with him again to the
stocks,, , cried the bishop, and to the stocks William was again hurried. Two long days and nights he
there lay, without any food, except a crust of brown
bread and a small supply of water. Poor boy, what
were his thoughts in these hours of trial ? Alone,
[67]
oppressed, and with the prospect of a painful death
before him, what did he suffer? What were the
prayers and cries which then went up to God from
his heart ? Surely he had grace given to him to bear
all with humble trust and patience ; or, like Paul
and Silas, as he felt the pressure of the wood on his
legs, he may have sung praises unto God. We can- not but believe that his Saviour, who tenderly feels for his suffering disciples, gave to him to taste his choicest comfort and love. Not satisfied with this act of cruelty, his enemies
proceeded to further lengths, in the hope of sub- duing his spirit. The bishop sent illiam to one
of the London prisons, with strict orders to the
jailer to put as many iron chains upon him as he
could possibly bear. And in a dungeon he was
confined for three-quarters of a year, hoping, trust- ing, praying always.
Bishop Bonner one day thought of the Bible- loving lad in prison, and hoping that his long con- finement, together with the natural love of liberty
and home, had made him more ready to yield, sent
for him to his palace. But the spirit of the young
martyr was yet unbroken, and his trust in the gos pel as firm as before. "If you recant,', said the bishop, "I will give
you forty pounds, and set you up in business. This was a large sum of money in those days, and
the offer was very tempting, but it was at once
rejected.
[68]
"I will make you steward of my own house,"
added Bonner, in a gentle and crafty manner.
"But, my lord," was the reply, "If you cannot persuade my conscience by Scripture, I cannot find in my heart to turn from God for the love of the world ; for I count all worldly things but loss, in comparison with the love of Christ." Will neither threats nor promises avail ? Then
away with him to the fire. When William again entered his native town, he
knew it was to endure a painful death. But yet he
knew what his Saviour had suffered for him. And
he remembered, too, the words, " Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.'' There was no prison in the little town, so the mar tyr youth was confined in an inn, and guarded by
constables. His mother heard of his return, and
with true love rushed to the place where he lay. Charity moved the hearts of the guards, and they
allowed her to see him, and to sit by his side. And
when she found him happy and constant, she bless- ed God for such a son, and the more so when he
said: "For my little pain which I shall sufi'er, Christ hath procured for me a crown of joy ; are you not glad of that, mother ?" They then knelt down and she prayed to God to strengthen her poor boy to the end. At length the morning came that young William was to die. The sherifi", justices, and priests were
duly in attendance, with executioners and guards,
[69]
while a crowd of people had come together, to the
last sad scene. As the young martyr was led along
from the inn, his father rushed forward towards him
in an agony of parental feeling. Throwing his arms
around the neck of his noble son, he said, with
flowing tears, God be with thee, son William.,' The son calmly looked for the last time on his dear parent, and replied, God be with you, father;
THE YOUTHFUL MARTYR. be of good comfort; I trust we shall meet again
where we shall rejoice together.
There were many weeping eyes on that day in 7
[70]
the little town of Brentwood. To see one so young —a kind, gentle, pious lad—dragged through the
streets to bear the scorching flames, whose only
offence was that he loved the gospel, was a sight that touched the hardest heart, and brought tears on many a manly cheek. William, as he passed
along, saw his father's cottage, and cast a last look on his sorrowing sisters. He bade farewell to those who had been the playmates and friends of his ear liest days. He was now to suffer in the cause of
Christ, and they saw that he feared not to die. At
last, the procession came to the end of the town,
where the stake and chain and fagots were ready.
Without loss of time he was secured by the chain,
and wood was piled around. While this was being
done, a pardon was offered if he would profess him self a papist.
"No,'' said William, resolutely, "I will not re- cant, God willing. Then turning to the people
he asked them to pray for him. " Pray for thee cried a hard-hearted justice
who was looking on, I will no more pray for thee than I would for a dog.''
"I pray Grod this may not be laid to your charge
at the last day," was William's calm reply.
A priest, too, began to taunt him ; until a gentle- man spoke aloud, May God have mercy on his soul;" and the people mournfully added, Amen."
The fire was now lighted, and as the flames began
[71]
to rise, William, who still held in his hand a book
of Psalms, threw it into the hands of his brother,
who had followed him to the place of death. His
brother calling to him said, William, think on the
sufferings of Christ, and be not afraid." "I am not afraid,'' added the martyr. "Lord,
Lord, receive my spirit." These were his last words. The fire was lighted; the dry fagots burned briskly;
and the flames soon wrapped around his body. In
a few minutes his sufferings were at an end for ever.
THE martyr's tree, BRENTWOOD. An old elm tree still marks the spot, near which
William Hunter yielded up his life for the truth.
[72]
Though three hundred years have passed since then,
his name is not forgotten. His soul has joined the noble army of martyrs', in heaven ; but the record
of his faith and courage will long survive on earth. Let us learn from his history:—1. The import- ance of early decision in the cause and service of
Christ; as a preservative in times of error and false religion.
2. The need of constancy in resisting the most
tempting offers to deny our Master. Like Moses
the servant of God, let us choose rather to suffer
aflSiction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the re- proach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt.-
3. The blessing of having pious parents. The
father and mother of William could give up such a son to Christ for Christ, encouraging him, even in the prospect of death, not to renounce the truth. May your parents never be called to such a test of
love.
4. The true character of Popery. Can that be the pure and holy religion of Jesus—the religion of love and mercy—which commits such dreadful deeds ? Christ was kind and loving to all. He came "not % to destroy men,s lives, but to save them.- When
his disciples would have used the sword, and have
called " down fire from heaven,- he rebuked them.
How different from his gentle and merciful spirit has
been the conduct of cruel persecutors in every age !
THE MAIDEN MARTYR.
More than two hundred and fifty years have pass- ed since a Spaniard thus wrote of his native land : —"In Spain, many very learned, many very no ble, and many of the highest gentry, have for this
cause'' (that of the reformed faith) been led forth
to the scaffold. There is not a city, and, if one may
so speak, there is not a village, nor a hamlet, nor a
noble house in Spain, that has not had, and still has, one or more that God of his infinite mercy has
enlightened with the light of his gospel. Our ene- mies have done what they could to put out this
light, and thus they have visited with loss of pro perty, of honor, and of life, very many in Spain.
And yet it is worthy of note, the more they threat en, scourge, throw into the galleys, imprison, or burn,
the more they multiply.'' * The good work had been begun and carried on
chiefly by the means of Bibles and tracts. Although
the Inquisition kept strict watch and strong guard,
to prevent all books from entering the land, it was
so managed, that they were carried from the border
* De Castro's Spanish ProteatantR. 7*
[74]
towns to those in the interior, in bales of goods,
and were gladly bought by all classes. And thus
the work of the Reformation went silently and
steadily on. But cloudy days indeed have come
over the country of Spain since the times of which we speak; the light has been put out, and gross darkness covers the people.
One of the cities in which the gospel took the deepest root was Seville, a place of great wealth and
trade, and famous for its noble palaces, beautiful churches and ancient dwellings.
Among its other buildings there once stood a long and lofty range, whose gloomy walls and iron- barred windows marked it as a prison. The passen ger, as he drew nigh to it, quickened his pace, and
trembled at the thought that he might one day be
shut up in its dreary cells. This place was the
court of the Inquisition, so called, because it was
the tribunal set up to inquire into the opinions of any who were inclined to renounce the religion of
the land. This court sent forth a class of monks as its agents, known as the inquisitors, or inquirers, to search out and punish all those who did not prompt ly submit to the creed of Popery. The steps of
these inquisitors took hold on death. Few who
went into their presence returned again to their homes. Fires were kindled by them, and many
faithful servants of Christ were cast into the flames.
[75]
Others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourg ings, yea, moreover, of bonds and imprisonment."
The unhappy victim who passed the iron gate of
the Inquisition was led through several halls, one opening into the other, and each increasing in dark ness, until the last was shrouded in dismal shadows. A single window looked into the yard below, around
which were ranged the entrances to the cells, sunk
far below the surface of the ground. The descent
into these was by many winding ways, that from
their depths the cries of the prisoners might not be
heard. The sweet light and pure air of heaven
entered not there. All was black, and damp, and
terrific. In some of these vaults human bones were
spread on the ground, and the walls were covered with the names of those who had been left to perish,
unpitied and unknown. There were cruel and
wicked deeds done in those silent vaults, in the name
of the holy and merciful Saviour, which, could we know them fully, would fill our hearts with shame
and horror. The assistants to the inquisitors were called familiars; that is, those attached to the family', or order of monks. In the darkness of the night
these familiars suddenly stood before the door of a house, with their faces entirely covered with a hood,
in which were two small holes for the eyes. No
one dared to resist their power, or to assist the
object of their search in his escape. It might be
[76]
that they had got a father to inform against his
wife, or a mother against her son, or a brother
against a sister ; for all the bonds of love and duty were broken by their craft. It was enough if any
one were suspected of having read, or lent, or kept
in the house a book of the reformed faith; or had a Protestant for a friend, or had tried to console and
aid a prisoner in the cells. They had now come for the unhappy person in an hour when he was at
rest. The door must instantly be opened, and at once they seize him, and carry him away to their dungeons. There, perhaps, to lie for many months,
in awful suspense, wearied and worn, before he
knew the charge that he was called to answer. Among those who had been seized by the servants
of the Inquisition, and brought before its court, was
a young Spanish lady, named Maria de Bohorques,
the daughter of a gentleman of high condition in
Seville, and related to several noble families. Her
early youth was full of hope and promise, and her
home was cheered by every earthly comfort. But
she had been led by divine grace to give her heart
to Christ, and set her affections on. things above. Maria, when about twenty-one years of age, was
suspected of being faithless to the church of Rome.
Her tutor. Doctor Gil, who had been led to embrace
the reformed faith, was one of the most learned men
of the age. Under his care she had studied the Holy Scriptures in their original languages. A
[77]
blessing had attended the reading of the word of God; and her gifted and inquiring mind had found
the only foundation on which true religion rests. She was not long in learning that the Roman Cath olic religion is contrary to the truth of God, and
she had courage to make known what she knew and
felt.There were times when Maria thought of the
terrible Inquisition. In her hours of secret study
and prayer, she had asked of God to give her
strength, if the day of trial which had come to many should at last reach her. And now it had
come, and she stood alone and undefended before her judges.
The maiden martyr was led by the officers into a secret chamber, where at a table sat the inqui sitors, clad in dark robes, their faces scarcely to be
seen, from the position in which they sate, amid the deep gloom of the place. Before them was a small wooden cross, and a roll of paper inscribed with the charge against the prisoner. By their side were
guards and witnesses. Soft words were at first spoken. They told her
that they wished well to her soul ; that they hoped
to restore a stray sheep to the fold. As she listened
• to their address, Maria prayed in her heart, and
strength was given her to be faithful. She boldly
owned her hope in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and
refused to yield to the smooth speeches or the angry
[78]
threats of her judges. They then declared that, unless she submitted to the church of Rome, she should be tried by torture. And to awaken terror in the mind of the young Christian, there were
spread out to view the engines of cruelty used in that horrid chamber. She was pointed to the
pulley, by which a prisoner was raised to the roof
of the dungeon, with heavy weights fastened to the
feet ; to the rack, on which the body was violently • stretched ] to the fire, over which the feet of the
sufferers were hung.
The judges were concerned to know who were her
[79]
companions in the faith, and called on her to make
them known. But she gave no reply. Again they
directed her eyes to the instruments of torture, with
a threat of their severest trial. Still she stood firm ly in her resolve. The order was now given to stretch her upon the rack : and, like wolves greedy
for their prey, the officers seized her, and casting her on the frame, they secured her wrists and feet
to the cords. In a few minutes the slow turn of the wheel drew her tender limbs, as though they
would be torn from her body. In this position of agony Maria was again called on to confess; but the bold girl refused to renounce
her own faith or betray those she loved. Another
turn of the cruel wheel was made, and her joints
seemed to start from their sockets. Poor lonely one
!
the men in whose hands she had fallen had no hearts
to feel; to them mercy was unknown. Great as was her misery, and wh,n she thought it had
reached its height, it was as though it only had be- gun. New seats of pain were reached, and in the depth of her woe she called for pity.
Perhaps many have said to themselves, If we
were called to be martyrs we would show our perse-
, cutors how to die." But how little do we know
our own weakness ! In the hour of her greatest
pain, when scarcely sensible of what she said, poor Maria owned that her sister Juana had often spoken
to her about the reformed faith, and was a secret
[80]
follower of it. This confession soon cost Juana her
life ! To the rack she was quickly brought, and on
being removed from it, she lay for a short time in the greatest agony, and then died. But Maria—what had she done ? She felt that she had been faithless to the cause she loved. She
had betrayed one dearer to her than her own life. When they took her from the wheel, they carried her to a cell. It was sweet to her to lie on that cold stone floor, and feel that the wheel was no
longer dragging her life away. Yet she had only
gained a short release at the expense of a beloved
sister. Another day of trial was at hand. Maria was soon doomed to the flames as. a heretic; but before the sentence was carried into effect, two priests were
sent to her, then another two, and again two more. They went to her cell in the hope that she might
yet yield, and profess *her faith in the church of Rome.
It must have been an affecting sight to have be- held that poor young creature—her limbs all bruised and full of intense pain—without any human friend —reclining on the straw of her cell, while she meek ly and piously disputed with the crafty priests. She
heard their words in patience, and then calmly re- fused to receive their doctrine. Hour after hour
they tried all their art and power, but in vain. She
told them of her weakness in suffering; but yet she
[81]
looked to God for grace to bear all, and to go bold ly to the burning pile rather tban deny the truth she loved. On the morning of the 24th of September, 1559, more than one fatal stake was driven in the great square of the city of Seville. A number of the
THE GREAT SQUARE OF SEVILLE. reformed faith were to be burned that day. Among
them was Maria de Bohorques. Early in the morn ing the officers came to her cell, to carry her to the place of death, for the torture had deprived her
of the power to walk. Feeble in body, she was
8
[82]
yet strong in heart. Her inward strength was made
perfect in weakness and suffering. The Lord was
with her; she " endured, as seeing Him who is in visible." Her looks betrayed no fear. Ifc was to her
a day of victory and deliverance. Through the
flames she knew that she should pass to glory.
There were other female Protestants burned in
Seville's great square at the same time, and Maria
sought to comfort her sister martyrs. She invited them to join with her in singing a hymn. And above
the noise and tumult of the crowd, there assembled,
their sweet voices were heard sounding the praises of the Saviour. They then cheered one another as they stood ready for death.
It was usual at such a time, when the victims were bound to the stake, and the torch was about to be applied to the wood, for one more attempt to be made to induce the prisoner to confess. For this purpose several priests, oUt of regard to the youth,
talent and family connections of Maria, tried yet
again to bring her to renounce her faith. She was
asked to repeat the creed, and this she did in a firm voice ; but, at the same time, she explained its several parts in the Protestant sense. Finding that they gained nothing by their attempts, the officers were ordered to strangle her. This done, the pile was soon lighted, and her body was consumed.
Her released spirit passed beyond the reach of her
tormentors, there to receive the martyr's crown
[83]
from the hands of her Lord and Saviour—a crown which he purchased with his own most precious
blood, and which is the rich gift of his grace and
love. As we fondly cherish the memory of those who
"loved not their lives unto death," we may well
direct our thoughts to their happy state now in the world of glory.
Who are they, clothed in radiant white, That stand around yon golden throne
:
Their garments of celestial light. Pare with a lustre not their own ? These are the saints, who once below Walked in the path their Master trod ; Midst pain, and mockery and woe, And scorching flames, they sought their God. Through His dear might who once was slain, Firm at the burning stake they stood, And washed, from every guilty stain, Their garments in his precious blood. Therefore around the throne they stand, And in his holy temple shine ; Rich in the joy of his right hand, Robed in his righteousness divine. There they can never hunger more, Nor ask the cooling draught in vain ; For He will living waters pour. And heal from every earthly pain. In those blessed realms of endless day. The Lamb shall all their wants supply ; And God's own hand shall wipe away
The falling tear from every eye.
<h2>THE PROTESTANTS.</h2>
There have been Protestants from the first
:
those who have ,protested against the errors of the
age. They have been mostly a "little flock," often driven into the caves of the mountains, or hidden
in forests and sheltered valleys, yet have they not
failed to bear a testimony for God and his truth. Among these pious worthies were the Waldenses. In very early times the glad news of redeeming love was carried to them, and it took deep root in their
hearts. It met a welcome, and was believed, loved,
and cherished. In their lowly valleys they long
kept the faith," protected by their humble and
obscure condition ; while the nations around them
were sunk in the greatest errors. The range of mountains known as the Alps lies north of Italy and east of France. Towards the south side of this range is the country of Piedmont,
and here, on a small tract of land, still live the "men of the valleys,,' the descendants of the early
Waldenses, the " martyr people,,' as they were
called—the Protestants of their times. Their homes sti,etch up the Alps, and down into
[85]
the plain below, and are formed into little hamlets and villages. Those by the plain are very pleasant,
with meadows and vineyards, wheat and rye fields, and gardens. Mulberry trees fringe the road-sides,
giving food for the vast multitudes of silkworms,
which spin silk for the people to trade in. Higher
up, the way winds among huge frowning cliffs, by
the sides of which torrents dash down to the plains below. Here and there are little valleys open to the
sun, edged by forests of firs, warm and green, where
a cluster of cottages lie nestled close together, sur- rounded by patches of potatoes and corn, while
herds of cattle and flocks of goats are grazing on the
grassy spots of the mountain side. Still higher up, the trees dwindle to dwarfs ; deep snows cover the
peaks, and masses of ice, which sometimes tumble
down from the heights, destroying everything in their way. Here everything looks wild and dreary,
and you wonder how any one can live there. In
this diversified region of snow and sunshine, of peak and hollow, live the successors of the martyr people, numbering now, perhaps, about twenty-two
thousand souls. Away up in their mountain retreats the Walden ses never fell into the same corrupt way of thinking
of the gospel as nearly all the rest of Europe had. No ; they, to a great extent, held fast to the pure
word of God, They said, Men ought not to go
to Rome for the pardon of their sins, nor seek to 8*
[86]
saints and relics for help. "The church," they
declared, " is founded, not on St. Peter, much less on the pope ; but upon Christ and his doctrines as taught in the Bible.'' They maintained that it was
wicked idolatry to worship images, or so much as
to have them in the churches. Behold, how they
protested against Popery ! They were real Pro testants long before Luther's reformation, or before the name Protestant" was given to Christians. For several hundred years nobody thought of harming these lowly people in their mountain val leys. They had no riches to tempt the great and
the warlike to invade their homes. It was almost
as though they were forgotten by the rest of the
world. And thus shielded from many of the evils which came upon others, they were in a great measure faithful to the truth as it is in Christ. As
they grew in love to the Saviour, they wanted others
to love him also, and to enjoy the light and comfort which he can give to the soul. So poor little Al- pine churches sent missionaries out, two by two,
to France, to Germany, to Italy, and all about. Is
it not beautiful to see how the love of Christ moves
the heart ? It not only makes us desire to be good,
but to do good. It leads us to deny ourselves, and
seek to relieve the sorrows of others. That is just
what Jesus did. He came into the world to seek and
to save the lost. "He came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister." He was as a servant for the
[87]
good of others. So will his true followers, when
filled with his love, strive to benefit all on whom
they can exert an influence. Not only did these children of the Alps send missionaries forth, but
colporteurs, or book-hawkers also. Thus did they
employ these agents more than four hundred years ago—pious pedlars, who, with their goods, carried
leaves of the Bible, and icritten tracts—for this was
before the invention of printing—and left them with
those found willing to receive them. In ways like these, Bible piety was kept alive in many hearts and homes and hamlets, while the darkness of Popery rested on the nominally Christian world. These Waldenses, then, were among the first Pro testants in the church. But we will now pass to the time when the name Protestant was to be distinctly adopted by
those who refused to submit to the church of Rome.
The case was similar to that of which we read in the New Testament, when all who were the follow ers of Jesus were Christians, before they were so
called in the city of Antioch (Acts xi. 26 ;) but
after that time they went forth glorying in the name
of their Divine Master. So from the time of which we now speak men began to rejoice in the name of
Protestants. Spire is an ancient city on the banks of the
river Rhine, in Germany. In the days of Luther it was a place of great trade and wealth. Lofty towers
[88]
lined its strong walls ; noble buildings adorned its streets ; and pleasant walks were formed on the out side of the city. This place was selected by Charles
the Fifth, the emperor of Germany, to hold a "diet', or assembly, to consult on the state of the country
and of the Roman Catholic church. This emperor,
his brother Ferdinand, (king of Spain,) and the
pope, were the three great enemies of the Reforma tion. They were bold, rich, and powerful, and were
CITY OF SPIRE. quite resolved to put an end to the "new doctrines,'' as they called them ; though, indeed, they were the
old doctrines preached by the Apostles. In the
[89]
hope to stop their progress, they called this great
assembly in this famous place of resort. Before the day came for the diet to commence
business, the Roman Catholic princes and bishops
entered the city of Spire with great pomp aod mili- tary array, as if they were going to war. One or two of the princes who favored the Reformation
also drew nigh at the head of their horsemen; while
others were attended with only a few learned and
pious men, whose calm and cheerful looks showed
that they were not ashamed of the cause they were
about to plead. Besides these, there were deputies
or persons acting on the part of several of the "free
cities'' of Germany. Never before was there a great er gathering for such a purpose in any country of Europe.
The Protestant princes wore these letters braided on their right sleeves, v. D. M. i. being the
first letters of the Latin words Verhum Domini
manet in jEternum, (" The word of the Lord en- dureth for ever,'' 1 Peter i. 25.) The same letters were placed over the doors of the hotels in Spire
where they lodged. Thus the Bible was the ensign
under which they stood arrayed.
It had boen proposed that the princes of the German empire should be at liberty to make such
reforms in their churches as they saw necessary, with the permission of the emperor. This the pope
did not like at all. Liberty of conscience he
strongly opposed. People must not think for
[90]
themselves in matters of religion," he said, "or make what reforms they please ; but they must
think and act according to what the church of Rome
teaches, and that church alone." They were resolved to put down all religious
liberty. They first sent down an order that the
gospel should not be preached in the city of Spire
by the reformers ; but the princes, on their arrival,
urged their right to a place of worship for their use. Their demand was sternly denied. The princes then ordered their preachers to conduct divine
service in the halls of their palaces and hotels ; and
such was the thirst of the people to hear the word,
that eight thousand of them were present one Lord's day during the morning and evening worship of the
evangelical princes. While the papal worship was
carried on in the beautiful cathedral of Spire, before a small number of people, crowds from town and
country filled the places where the word of God
was preached by the reformed pastors. The princes thus boldly made known their faith. They said they would give up their kingdoms and their lives rather than submit to what they believed was
wrong. We will,'' said they, obey the emperor
in everything that may maintain peace and the honor of God; but we cannot submit to give up the
truths of the Bible, nor the simple worship of God."
The princes were out-voted by the diet, but not
cast down. Let us reject the decrees which re- fuse us redress," they cried; in matters of con-
[91]
science we must endure everything, sacrifice every- thing—our crowns, our lives—rather than give up
the word of God." But they soon found that the
diet spurned their claims, and would not listen to their words. Had not, then, the time come for them to make a solemn protest against the false and
shameful conduct of their opposers? Yes; they all saw it was the hour to make a brave stand for the truth ; and hand to hand, and heart to heart, they went forward in the course of duty.
THE PROTEST AT SPIRE. It was on the 25th of April, 1529, that they met
in a little room on the ground floor of a minister's
[92]
house in St. John's Lane, in the city of Spire—
a
room which is still shown to the traveller. And
there, with prayerful and brave hearts, and steady
hands, they all stood forward. There were John
the Constant, of Saxony, Philip of Hesse, George of Brandenburg, and other noble princes, together
with deputies from several chief cities. One by
one they signed their names to a paper in which
they appealed against the violent acts and the
errors of the followers of the pope. As they placed
their seals to the Protest, they said, We appeal,
for ourselves, for our subjects, and for all who re- ceive, or who shall hereafter receive, the word of God.'' Two lawyers of the city then added their names as witnesses, and the deed was done. They
had now cut the cords that had bound them to the church of Rome, and were free. It has been said that the upper chamber in Jeru salem, in which the disciples met and continued
with one accord in prayer, and that lower chamber
in the city of Spire, were " the two cradles of the church." The princes and other reformers returned to the
diet, and John the Constant, elector of Saxony,
who had first signed the paper, stood before king
Ferdinand and the bishops, with the Protest in his hand. And thus he read : — We are resolved, with
the grace of God, to maintain the pure preaching
of his holy word, such as is contained in the
[93]
books of the Old and New Testaments, without
adding anything thereto that may be contrary to it. This word is the only truth ; it is the sure rule of
all doctrine and of all life, and can never fail or de- ceive us. He who builds on this foundation shall stand against all the powers of hell, whilst all the human vanities that are set up against it shall fall before the face of God.,' "We earnestly entreat you,,' they went on to
say, to weigh carefully our wrongs and our
motives. If you do not yield to our request, we
Protest before G-od, our only Creator, Preserver,
and Redeemer and Saviour, and who will one day
be our Judge, as well as before all men and all creatures, that we, for us and our people, neither consent nor adhere in any manner to the proposed
decree'' (which had been made to deprive them of
their Christian liberty) "in anything that is con trary to God, to his holy word, to our right con science, and to the salvation of souls.'' King Perdinand wished to return the Protest to those who brought it ) but the princes would not
take it back. They placed it on the table, and then
respectfully quitted the room. Thus did these bold men act and speak. They did not stand as though
they were perplexed or alarmed; but, with the word of God in one hand, and the Protest in the
other, they lifted up their heads in courage and
hope. 9
[94]
This appeal they also sent to the emperor Charles. When the messengers stood before him, he looked upon them in his pride, and speedily sent them
from his presence till he should give his decision. After keeping them waiting for a month, he had
them put under arrest, and threatened them with
death if they left the town or wrote to their friends
at Spire.
It was soon found by the reformers that all at- tempts to have the free use of the word of God and
liberty of conscience were at an end ; and they pre- pared, in prayer and faith, for the struggle they saw before them. They left the city of Spire re- solved to be Protestants, and to hold fast by the
Bible, and the Bible only, as their rule of faith, and
their guide to heaven. And from that day to the present the conflict has continued between truth and error—the doctrines of the gospel and the vain devices of popery. Nor
will it cease until truth shall prevail, and ,Uhe
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.', Until that happy
time shall come, the young must be taught against
what they protest, and why they do so, that they
may not bear the name of Protestant in vain. Like the reformers at Spire, they must Protest against all attempts to deprive them of the free use
of the Bible; because our Saviour directed the
people to search the Scriptures" (John v. 89;)
[95]
and of Timothy it was said, " From a child thou
hast known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which
is in Christ Jesus.', (2 Tim iii. 15.) They must
be Bible Christians, in distinction from those whose
faith rests on the word and traditions of men. They must Protest against making the apostle Peter the foundation of the church (though he was
one of the chief of the disciples ;) because it is written, Other foundation can no man lay than
that is laid, which is Christ Jesus. 1 Cor.
iii. 11. They must Protest against paying Divine worship
to the virgin Mary (though she was " blessed among women ;',) because it is declared, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.'' Matt. iv. 10. They must Protest against praying to saints and
angels as mediators; because it is written, "If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous'' (1 John ii. 1 ;) and
there is but one Mediator." 1 Tim. ii. 5. They must Protest against the Papal doctrine of the mass, or the celebration of the Lord's supper as a sacrifice for sin, when a piece of wafer is called the host, or victim," and is worshipped; because such conduct is opposed to the Scripture doctrine
"of one sacrifice for sin," which Christ oflered once for all." Heb. x. 10, 12.
[96]
They must Protest against the priests withhold- ing the wine from the people at the Lord,s supper; because our Lord said, "Drink ye all of it." Matt,
xxvi. 27. They must Protest against the Romish doctrine
of human merit ; because the Scriptures teach us, " We are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus', (Rom. iii. 24;)
and "if by grace, then is it no more of works. Rom. xi. 6. They must Protest against the vain doctrine of purgatory, or a state in another world in which the remains of sin are cleansed by fire; because it is written, " The blood of Jesus Christ his Son clean- seth us from all sin.', 1 John i. 7. They must Protest against these, and all other
errors of the church of Rome; because they* are contrary to the Holy Scriptures, which God has given to us to be the sufficient and only rule of
faith and practice. Let the young, then, well con sider why they are called Protestants; and let them
be earnest to receive into their hearts those great truths which the apostles and reformers preached,
and through the reception of which alone, by the grace of the Holy Spirit leading them to a true
faith in Jesus Christ, they can be saved.
<h2>THE TRAGEDY OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S DAY.</h2>
THE LOUVRE,
In the Sixteenth Century, from an old print. King Charles the Ninth of France, and his chief officers of State, were in solemn debate in the
council chamber of the old palace of the Louvre. They had met on an affair of death ; the death not 9*
[98]
of one, nor of a few, but of thousands of the peace able inhabitants of the land. On the table before them lay a well-written roll of parchment. It was the register of the noblemen
and gentry in France of the reformed or Protestant
faith. A strict inquiry had been made through the
provinces, that it might contain the names of all. And now the council were planning how and when
the deed should be done—a deed which was de- signed to root out, with unsparing hand, the hated Huguenots * from the kingdom. Time and circum stances, it was thought, were favorable. Many of the Protestants had been invited to Paris, under
the pretence of being present at the marriage of king Henry of Navarre with a princess of France.
Feasts and sports had been provided for them, and
everything was done to lull them into a state of
false security.
The young king took up a pen to sign the order
for the slaughter, and, casting his half-closed eyes on the ground, with struggling feelings cried, Since it is to be done, take care that no one es- capes to reproach me.', The time fixed on was St. Bartholomew's Day,
August 24th, 1572 ; the hour, three o'clock in the
* The word Huguenot signifies " associated" or " united together;"
it has nearly the same meaning as brethren," one of the titles of the
first Christians. Some writers, however, assert that it is derived from
the name of the smallest copper coin known in France in the middle
ages, and that it was employed as a term of contempt.
[99]
morning, when their victims would be sleeping in
their beds ; the signal, the tolling of a great bell of one of the churches; the conductor of the murder,
the wicked duke of Guise. The gates were ordered
to be closed, and the walls secured ; lights were to be hung out from the highest points in the city, that the marks secretly placed on the houses of the doomed might be clearly seen. The soldiers and
others were directed to muster shortly after mid night, wearing a piece of white linen on their arms,
a white cross on their caps, and the image of the
virgin Mary around their necks, lest in the confusion
the assassins should be arrayed one against another. Their reward was to be the property of the slain. The armed bands, under the darkness of the
night, and with cautious steps, moved to the places
assigned to them, ready for their work of blood. In the palace of the Louvre all were wakeful. The
king was restless and troubled in his mind. He
seemed to start back at the thought of the guilt about to fall on his soul. He would have recalled the order he had given; but his mother, queen
Catharine, entered his chamber shortly after mid night, to confirm him in the horrid deed. She then
led him to a window, to await the event. And
there, until the city clocks struck two, stood a queen mother, encouraging her royal son to commit many
thousand murders ! It was one of those calm, lovely nights so com-
[100]
monlj enjoyed in France in the early autumn. A
gentle breeze passed over the garden of the Louvre;
and the unnumbered host of stars above seemed, in their soft lustre, to speak only of peace to man. The silence of the night, however, was broken by
the report of a pistol. Charles shook with terror, and cold drops stood upon his brow. The sound was
answered by the toll of the great bell, when suddenly
all the rest of the bells of the churches struck out
the signal. The armed men now sprang from their hiding places, shouting, as they rushed along the
streets, Kill ! Kill ! Death to the Huguenots V
The shrill sounds of the bells, the clatter of arms,
the tramp of the assassins, and the shrieks of the
dying, soon mingled in one long, loud, terrific sound. The duke of Guise, with his party, first rushed
to the house where lay Admiral Coligny, the chief and leader of the Protestants. They found him re- clining on a couch, suffering from a shot m his arm,
received a few days before in a base attempt to murder him. The Admiral was aroused from his slumbers by the noise made in breaking open his door. He partly arose from his couch, and com mitted his soul into the hands of God, when one of the soldiers, preparing to strike with his sword,
cried, Art not thou the Admiral I am,'' he
fearlessly replied ; but, young man, respect these grey hairs, nor stain them with my blood.'' In
another moment, regardless of the appeal, the man
[101]
plunged the sword into his bosom. After receiving the greatest outrages, his body was thrown out of
DEATH OF COLIGNY. the window, at the feet of one of the French princes,
who, spurning it, cried out, Courage, my friends; we have had a lucky beginning ] let us finish in the
[102]
same manner." The headless trunk was then drag ged through the streets of Paris, and afterwards hung up by the feet to the common gallows. The
young king, as though he had now overcome all scruple and tenderness, went to feast his eyes upon
the sight of the body of the man who but a few days
before he had called Man pire !—" My father The admiral's son-in-law, lord Teligni, next re- ceived his death-blow, and fell, repeating with his dying lips the names of his wife and children. Other nobles and attendants, with two young chil- dren, were then slain. After having murdered
every one in this house, the soldiers went forward on their dreadful purpose. And now arose everywhere the dreadful cry, "Kill! Kill V' The officers of the palace, as they
rapidly drove through the streets, cheered on the
soldiers with the cry, "Kill every one of them; it is the order of the king.'' The work of destruction was begun in many parts of the city at the same moment.
Open ! by command of the king," was the loud shout of the murderers at the doors of the houses. The unsuspecting Protestants hastened to obey, and
were at once cut down. Others, as they raised their windows to see who called them at that hour of the
night, were shot. While many, as it was the early morn of the Lord's day, took the tolling of the bells as the call to early prayers. Happy were they who
were surprised in their sleep, and who were smitten
[103]
as they quietly reposed on their beds. Their
sufferings were short, while others had their pangs
prolonged for hours. Tumults and shrieks increased, until they deep ened into one terrible groan. Pursued on all sides, they were tracked like the poor deer, or driven to the slaughter as a flock of sheep. If they sought
refuge in the churches, armed men guarded the
doors. If they fled to the palace, in the hope of moving the heart of the king by their piteous cry
for mercy, the soldiers awaited them with their spears and guns. If they burst open the prison
doors, to conceal themselves among the condemned,
they were from thence drawn out to die. They
fled to the banks of the river, but they were there caught by boat-hooks, and thrust into the water. Death was everywhere—in their beds, on the house tops, on the water, and on the land—in the palace
and in the humblest dwelling. Every spot was a
place of slaughter. The assassins spared not the
aged, nor women, nor the very babes ! With savage
joy they threw the bodies out of the houses, so that there was scarcely a street or lane but was strewn with the dead. The duke Montgomery, with about one hundred
Protestant gentlemen, who lodged without the walls,
hearing of the murders within the city, sought to escape, half naked, on horseback; but they were
overtaken, and all, except about ten of their number,
cut to pieces.
[104]
Thus, from morning to night, on the Lord's day,
this awful slaughter continued, until darkness put an end to the work of blood. The next day it was
carried on again. The soldiers were now joined by
all the ruffians in the city, who, for the sake of plunder, entered every place where any Huguenot
might have hidden himself; and if anyone were
found, he was slain, his body stripped, and then cast into the river. In this way, for five days, the slaughter went on, until thousands had fallen in Paris, by the sword, the spear, and the bullet. Messengers were quickly sent to the various pro- vinces and towns, commanding them to follow the example of Paris, in slaying all of the reformed
Protestant religion.
At the town of Angers lived a man, beloved for his virtue and learning, named Masson de Rivers, the pastor of the Protestant church. As soon as the
king's messenger arrived in the town, he hastened towards the pastor's house, and found him in the
garden. I am come to kill thee, by the king's
command,', said he, showing his letter of authority.
De Rivers declared his innocence of any offence; but while he was offering a short prayer to Grod, he was shot through the body.
At Lyons, when the letters from the court were
brought to Mandelot, (the governor,) he ordered, by
sound of trumpet, that all Protestants should appear
before him. They, without suspecting his design,
obeyed the summons, when they were thrust into
[105]
the city prisons. He then desired the soldiers to destroy them ; but they refused to direct their arms
against men bound and suppliant at their feet. Filled with wrath, the governor hired a number of the vilest men he could find, who, with chopping knives and butchers' axes, fell on the defenceless Huguenots, and, after first mangling their limbs for
sport, put an end to their lives. It is recorded, that
so great was the slaughter, that the warm blood ran from under the gates of the prisons down the streets, until it mingled with the waters of the neighboring
river ! Among those slain in this place were an
aged man, named Francis Collut, and his two sons. When Collut saw the murderers come towards him
with their axes, he piously said to his children, " Often do such sacrifices happen in Christian churches. Believers in all ages have ever been,
and even to the world's end shall be, as sheep among
wolves, and doves among hawks.,' Then, embracing
each other, and commending their spirits to God,
they submitted to the hands of the murderers. They
died in each other's arms, and in this state their bodies were afterwards found. In a few of the towns the governors refused to obey the orders of the king. One, named Ortezto,
nobly replied : — Sire, I have received your letter enjoining the inhabitants of Bayonne to a massacre
of the French Huguenots. Your majesty has many
faithful servants and brave soldiers in this city, but
10
[106]
not one executioner." The conduct of the Roman
Catholic bishop of Bayeux deserves also an honor able record. He not only refused to partake in the
slaughter, but protected and provided places of re- fuge for the defenceless Huguenots. One of the
officers of state, also, ordered his servants to throw
open his gates, as a refuge to the Protestants. He
did not long survive after this time ; and his con stant words were, After such horrors I do not wish to live.,' , When the king was told what had been done, he
pretended great displeasure. He invited the Pro testants who had escaped to the woods and forests to return to their homes. The poor hunted crea tures, hoping that pity might yet find a place in the heart of the king, obeyed the royal command. But
in about two days they were seized, and the hand
of murder again was raised against them. During
this time king Charles was not only a witness of the sad sights from the windows of his palace, but
it is said he even fired on some men who were try ing to escape. The sight of blood had quenched
whatever pity at first he may have felt, and aroused
the worst passions of his heart. " For thirty days together,,' says an account
written the year after the massacre, there was no
end of killing, slaying, and robbing; so that at this day there are thousands of little babes and children, that were well born, now fatherless and motherless,
[107]
and in beggary." De Thou, a Papal historian,
states the number slain throughout France, on this occasion, to have been thirty thousand; other ac- counts give from sixty thousand to one hundred
thousand. The messenger who carried the news to Rome was
rewarded with a thousand crowns. And the pope
joyfully cried aloud, " Good news ! good news V
Guns were fired at the castle of St. Angelo, and bon fires blazed in the public streets. A solemn proces sion was formed of the popes, cardinals, and officers of state, who, in the church of St. Mark, wickedly
offered up thanks to God for the " uprooting of the
heretics.'' To keep up the memory of the event, the pope ordered a medal to be struck. On one side was the portrait of the pope ; on the other, a de- stroying angel holding a cross in one hand, and a sword in the other, with which he is slaying the
Protestants; and on this medal were the words, " Ugonottorum strages," ,Hhe slaughter of the
[108]
Huguenots." Thus has the church of Rome pre- served the evidence of its own crimes. Whatever king Charles of France hoped to gain
by destroj'ing his Protestant subjects, he was miser- ably disappointed. The short remnant of his days was a fulfilment of Scripture : " Whoso rewardeth
evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house."
Prov. xvii. 13. His kingdom was disturbed, the
confidence of his people was lost, and his own
family were in a continual state of strife. Ever after the massacre of St. Bartholomew's day his counte- nance was marked with a settled gloom, or with a
flush he had never before worn, arising from the hauntings of a guilty conscience within. He
gradually sank under a slow internal fever, that wasted his strength. In his last hours he endured
frightful agonies, and he died miserably, at the age
of only twenty-four.
As we think of this unhappy prince sinking into an early grave, oppressed by the horrors of an
accusing conscience, are we not reminded of the words of Holy Scripture ? The wicked plottetli
against the just ; they have drawn out the sword,
and have bent their bow, to slay such as be of up right conversation. Their sword shall enter into
their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.'' Psa. xxxvii. 12—15. How long shall all the workers of iniquity boast themselves ? They break in pieces thy people,
[109]
0 Lord, and afflict thine heritage. —But the Lord
shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness. Psa. xciv.
4, 23. Such persecution has often been, in ages past, the lot of the true church of God : but amidst all the cruelties that have raged against it in the world,
God has ever preserved to himself a people. Well
has it been said that the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church. It was so in France ; for
as these pious men were cut off, others arose in their
place. Many of the people, beholding their holy
lives, and the peace with which they met the most
cruel deaths, were led to renounce former errors, and "to inquire after the way of salvation through
the Lord Jesus Christ.
10*
<h2>THE FLIGHT OF THE HUGUENOTS.</h2>
About two hundred and fifty years ago, there was great joy in the dwellings of the Protestants in France. The news had spread over the land that the king had, while in the city of Xantes, sent out
a decree in favor of the persecuted. They had
passed many long years of trouble ; their places of worsUp had been broken down ; their ministers sent out of the land, and many of their friends had been
slain. But henceforth they were to have the free exercise of their religion and the rights of citizens. Their sick poor were to be allowed to enter the pub lic hospitals, and other privileges of the kind were
to be fully enjoyed. They were a loyal and thank ful people, and they welcomed these benefits with
gratitude to the king, and with ruany praises to God.
The Protestants were now at liberty to attend to trade, and the care of the land. Their peaceful
and active habits soon made them well known. Xo
looms made finer silk, no ploughs were more busy
in the fields, and no vines were more fruitful than
theirs. They soon became the best workpeople in
[111]
the country. And this was as it should be ; for the
purest faith should always be connected with in- dustry and attention to the duties of life. Henry the Good," as the king was called, had
been once a Protestant; but he changed his religion
to obtain an earthly crown. Many mourned that he should have forgotten the example and counsel
of a pious mother : still he did not quite neglect the friends of his early youth. He knew their worth, and did much to serve them. His merciful conduct did not please the Papists, and one day he was stabbed by a wretched priest while riding in
his carriage in the city of Paris. The Protestants soon found that the next king who came to the throne bore no love towards them ; and they had to
suffer many hardships. At length, Louis the Four teenth revoked the edict given in the city of Nantes,
although it had been declared that it should never be altered. When it suited the purpose of the Pa pists, they did not scruple to break all the laws which showed any kind of favor to the Protestants, even when they had been secured to them by the most solemn oaths and pledges.
And now, instead of joy, there was only mourn ing and sorrow in many of the castles and cottages of France. The enemies of the truth had obtained
the power they wanted, and they were at liberty to oppress as they pleased. Severe laws were passed,
in the hope of rooting out the reformed religion.
[112]
Heavy fines were laid upon those who did not adorn
their houses on saints' days, and heavy blows if they did not kneel when a Papal procession went
along the streets. They were not allowed to be
doctors, booksellers, printers, or even grocers. No
apprentice could be taught a trade in their shops. If they were heard to sing hymns in public or
private, they were sent to prison ; their psalm book was publicly burned ; and the Bible was taken out
of their houses. Their places of worship were again
broken into and destroye(i ; their ministers were
sent out of the land, or shut up in jail. The sick could only be attended by Papal priests ; and the bodies of those who died were often torn out of
their graves, and left to be devoured by wolves and
vultures. The distress of the Huguenots was at its height,
when they saw their dear children torn from their arms, and carried away to be brought up as Papists.
The joy of watching over them, of hearing their simple little prayers, and of telling them of the
love of Christ in dying on the cross for sinners, was
no more to be known by them. And theirs was the
bitter grief of not knowing whether their beloved
ones were faithful to the truth or had denied it, whether they were suffering torture in a monastery
or nunnery, or laid in the quiet grave. Times of trial show who truly love the Lord
Jesus Christ. It was so now. Many who were
[113]
once known as Protestants forsook the faith of their
fathers. Some were gained over with titles and
honors, others with promises of reward ; many from
fear of a dungeon and death ; and numbers were
bribed with large sums. The common people were
offered a freedom from taxes for two yearS; besides a gift of money, if they would change their religion within one month. Those who would not turn were
to pay double taxes and a fine of ten pounds—
a
large sum in those days. The effect was that many
denied their Lord, some from terror, and others from hope of such a reward as the wicked could
give. Happy did those think themselves who could make their escape to other lands, even though they
left behind them all their worldly goods.
There were sad sights in those days, and those had hard hearts who did not shed tears at the suf- ferings of the afflicted Christians who had remained
faithful in evil times. One scene was beheld in a
little country town which made many weep. The
good Protestant pastor was to have his limbs broken
upon a wheel—one of the most painful deaths that could be endured. His enemies did not destroy life at once ; they seemed to take delight in adding to
his sufferings. For two days he was left in the
deepest agony on the wheel. In the midst of his pain he thus spoke to those who stood by : Jesus
Christ has satisfied for my sins, and not only for mine, but for the sins of all those who shall go to
[114]
* him by faith, as now I do. I cast myself upon the merits and death of Jesus, and cling to him as my
Saviour and Redeemer. My dear people, receive my last farewell, and know that I preached to you
the pure truths of the gospel—the true way that
leads to heaven. Among others who were faithful were a gentle- man and his wife. A number of soldiers were sent
to their mansion. They rudely burst open the
doors, carried off some of their goods, and sold them. . They then made stables of the beautiful rooms, and
caused their horses to lie upon the rich beds. When
the ruin of the house was at an end, the master of
it went forth with his wife, leading by the hand
four little children under seven years of age. As
they passed out at the doors their persecutors threw
upon them from the windows pitchers of water. TTet and cold, they went forth without a home and with- out food. After a short journey they came to a
friend's house, where they were taken in, and in the
first night of this distress the mother had another
little infant born. But there was to be no shelter allowed for these pious outcasts. A band of soldiers traced them to the spot, and drove them out—with
the baby, only three days old, in its mother's arms I After years of trial, this family found a happy home
in England.
Many an interesting story of the flight of the Huguenots has been preserved. A family who saw
[115]
that there could be no peace in their own land,
planned a way for their escape. They first conceal- ed their money, jewels, and other valuables in quilt ed silk petticoats, secretly worked by the lady and
her daughter, and which they sent to England. The
two eldest sons had already contrived to leave the country ; there remained now the parents, a daughter
aged sixteen, and two little boys of four and six years old. Just as they were all ready to start, the
father was betrayed and carried to prison. Those
he loved hastened to visit him, when he urged them
to flee to a place of safety, in the hope that the time
would come when he should be able to join them
again. His wife, attended by a male servant, went
in disguise to a sea-port, and there arranged for a passage to England for herself and three children. She then concealed herself in a house, while the
servant went back to bring the children. The eld est daughter, dressed as a peasant girl, placed her young brothers each in a pannier or basket, which
was slung across the back of a donkey. She then
well covered over the little boys with fruits and veg etables, and on the top of all some poultry in a basket were placed. The children had been charged,
whatever should happen by the way, on no account
to speak or move. We shall see how bravely these
little ones behaved in their trying condition. The
servant, in the dress of a country farmer, rode first on horseback. He moved in advance, as if he
were unknown to the girl with the donkey ; though
[116]
he took care to keep in sight as she went along the
road. The young refugee daughter traveled at night
;
but as time was precious, the latter part of the journey had to be taken by daylight. Mingled
hope and grief filled her mind, as she either thought
of going to her mother and escaping to a land of
liberty, or of the sorrows of her dear father, left behind in his dreary prison. While on the road
she was alarmed at the sight of a party of horse THE FLIGHT OF THE HUGUENOTS.
soldiers riding towards her. They fixed their eye upon her, and then at the panniers. " What is in those baskets?', they cried. Before she could give
[117]
an answer, one of them drew his sword, and thrust
it into the pannier in which the younger child was
hid. No cry was heard ; no resistance was made.
The soldiers concluded that all was right, and turn- ing round, galloped quickly down the road. As
soon as they were out of sight the sister seized the
pannier, and threw off the upper part of its contents, expecting to find her little brother killed. As he
lifted up his arms towards his terrified sister, she saw he was covered with blood from a severe cut on
one of them. The child in the hour of danger, shut up in his basket-prison, knew that if he cried, his own life and the lives of his brother and sister would be lost, and he bravely bore the pain and was
silent. The sister bound up the wound as best she
could, and nursed him on the road with the fondest
care, and had the joy of finding that his life was
spared, though he carried a scar from the wound all his days. After a perilous journey the young refugees safe- ly reached the seaside. They secretly got on board
a ship, whose sails were soon spread to the wind ; and in a few days they safely landed in England.
But the father never followed them. Year after year
passed away, and there was the poor captive, though
not all the time in a dungeon, yet under restraint and unable to join those he loved. They never met
again on earth : may we not believe that, through
11
[118]
the merits of the Saviour, they all had a joyful
meeting before the throne of God in heaven ? Many were the plans of the persecuted Huguenots
for escaping out of their "house of bondage," as it was called. They dared not leave their homes
dressed for a journey, as they would be at once sus- pected, for they were strictly watched. Early in the morning, or late in the evening, they passed
from their doors gaily dressed, with a cane in hand,
as if going out for a short walk, or on a visit to a
friend. Some went forth as hunters, with a dog
running before them, and a gun over their shoulder. A few miles from their homes they changed their clothes—perhaps they put on the disguise of a
miller, with a sack of corn on the back; or of a peasant driving some cattle before them ; or of a porter with a loaded truck going to market. Sometimes a nobleman exchanged clothes with
his servant ; the former waited at table, assisted in the kitchen, cleaned the horses, and slept in a gar ret, while the real serving man lived in the best room of the house, and went to rest on its softest bed. Those who were too poor to adopt these methods, traveled at night—their food was chiefly wild berries gathered by the way; and in the day
they rested in the shelter of woods and caverns, with
a stone for their pillow. The women also passed in disguise, wheeling barrows or carrying a load. On
[119]
their perilous way they were exposed to rain, snow, and cold. Rivers were crossed by swimming;
mountains were climbed, and miry swamps were
passed, until a place of safety was reached. That
refuge attained, their first act was to cast them selves upon their knees, and there to offer thanks
to Grod for delivering them from the ,Hion's mouth." The new home of these poor refugees was mostly
across the sea, in England. As soon as they reached
the coast, they sought some kind ship-captain, who
hid them in his vessel under bales of goods and
heaps of coals, or in empty casks, where they had
only the bung-hole through which to breathe. A
Protestant nobleman, with forty persons, crossed the channel in the depth of winter, in a very small
vessel, hardly large enough to hold them. They
were overtaken by a storm, and were out at sea without food for days, their only support being a
little melted snow, with which they tried to satisfy their burning thirst, until they landed half dead on
the shores of England.
A husband and his wife tried to escape. They
each took a different road, to avoid suspicion. The man was caught and carried to prison, but the wife reached the English shores, where she anxiously
awaited her husband. To force the poor man to renounce his religion his jailers placed him in a dungeon with an iron floor, and no seat or means of
[120]
support. Under this was a strong fire. The iron
floor was then slowly heated, until the feet of the
prisoner were so fearfully burnt as to make him a
cripple for life. When they grew weary of tor- menting, the poor Huguenot was left to go about
the town on crutches—a misery to himself, and an
object of pity to all beholders. Years passed away, when one day a poor aged
Frenchman was seen hobbling about the streets of London. In broken English he asked the passers- by to tell him where he could find his wife. Some
could not understand his words; and those who
could were yet unable to aid him in his search. All he could tell them was that he was in search of his wife—his Louise." As he crept along one after- noon, with the constant inquiry on his lips, some
one directed him to a coffee-house near Soho Square,
kept by a French refugee. It was the resort of the Huguenots, many of whom by this time had
turned their skill to good account in busy London.
To this coffee-house the poor cripple made his way;
but no one there knew his wife. " She might be
alive," said they, "or she might be dead.', It seemed as if her name was now unknown on the
earth. In the corner sat a pedlar : he listened to what
was said, but made no reply. Yet were there kind ly thoughts and feelings in his heart. He had come to London to lay in a stock of goods; and
[121]
as, on his return to the country, he would pass through some towns where the French had found
a home, why, thought he, could he not make in- quiry if any one knew of the poor cripple's wife. As he pursued his way from place to place, he
ceased not to feel an interest in the sad story he
had heard in that coffee-house in London. At
length, he came to Canterbury, where he knew
many refugees followed the trades of jewelers and
wax-bleachers. He sought among them for any
one who might answer to the missing wife. The
strange tale soon got spread about, and it led to a 11*
[122]
delightful result. For there, indeed, lived the poor woman, getting her living by needlework. She
had long given up the hope of seeing her dear hus- band again : surely he was a galley-slave, or in some
dungeon, or dead. But now the pedlar's story reach- ed her ears, and she set off without delay for Lon don. There she soon found her aged afflicted hus- band, who had been reduced to the lowest poverty,
and was in utter despair of finding her he had so earnestly sought. It was a meeting of mingled joy
and sorrow. She rejoiced to behold again the com panion of her youth, and the professor of the same
faith ; but tears flowed fast as she beheld his help less state. After a short stay, they set out for Can terbury, where the faithful wife worked hard, and
nursed, and cherished the cripple-husband whom
she had often mourned as dead. Another Huguenot couple resolved to flee. They
could disguise themselves, but what was to be done
with their baby ? If they were seen passing through
the gates of the town in which they lived, with a
child, they would at once be seized. After many
thoughts, their plan was to wrap the infant as a
formless bundle, to one end of which they attached
a string. They then took advantage of a very deep
gutter, like that which runs in the middle of so many old streets in French towns. When night came, the gates of the place were, as usual, closed
fast. Now was the time. The living bundle was
[123]
duly placed in the gutter, near to one of the gates,
with many a prayer that the sleeping draught
would not be too strong, and yet so strong as to keep the child asleep. The parents knocked at the
gate, as though they wished to pass into the
country. The guard came out of his little house,
and well surveyed them. He knew they were Huguenots ; but where, thought he, is their child ? Will a Huguenot mother desert her tender babe,
that she may escape? Will she leave it to be
brought up as a Papist? Not she; so then the guard concluded that they were not about to flee
—
at least this time. He turned the heavy lock ; they
passed out ; and now again securing the gates, he
slowly turned into his guardroom. " Hush ! quick ! quick ! catch the end of the
string under the gate: There ! it is caught. Now,
gently draw it along in the shadow.,' Blessed be
the name of God, the babe is through. It has not
cried. The sleeping draught has done its work.
The infant is once again in its mother's arms; and
the parents, with their dear treasure, are on their way to the sea-shore. That couple, with their babe,
in a few days were safely in England, and their descendants may read this story on the page that recounts the adventures of their Huguenot fore- fathers. The new home of these poor refugees, as we
have said, was mostly in England. There were
[124]
many of all ranks in this land wlio felt for their sorrows ; they opened their houses to receive them,
and their purses to aid them in their need. But
the refugees came not to eat the bread of idleness. They carried with them their skill and their trades. Thousands made their way to London, and formed
almost a new town in the part of the outskirts known as Spitalfields ; and others founded a colony
at St. Giles-in-the-Fields. Some went to Norwich,
Coventry, Canterbury, Edinburgh, and other places.
Among the refugees in England were a duke, a duchess, several generals, counts, marquises, vis- counts, barons, judges, noble ladies, men of learning,
ministers, merchants, and captains.
There were also farmers and artisans. They
brought with them the useful arts of life as well as the example of their piety. ' The weaving of silk was their chief employment ; and soon their busy
looms were heard in many a dwelling. Even
noblemen became master weavers ; for though, in some instances, they had saved enough out of the wreck of their estates to provide for themselves,
they engaged in trade to help their companions in
tribulation." Before this time, the people of Eng land had to send abroad for many valuable articles; but now they could obtain them home-made. The
French introduced into their adopted country the
art of calico-printing and wax-bleaching ; the weav ing of velvet, silk stockings, crapes, bombazines,
[125]
gauzes, damask table-linen, cambric, and other
things of the kind. Besides, they brought with
them improved ways of manufacturing ribbons,
tapestry, baize, sail-cloth, and sacking ; new modes
also of dyeing, and making hats, pins, needles,
watches, lace, and looking-glasses. Some were
skilful as artists, and some in science. The first person who contrived a machine in England moved
by steam was Savary ; the best maker of telescopes was Dolland ; and the most famous biscuit-baker was Le Man, all belonging to refugee families. In these ways they repaid England for its protection ; and to the present day the people of that country gather
the fruits of the toils, losses, and sufferings, the
skill and the industry of those driven from their native land, for conscience' sake, by the base and
and cruel act which revoked the Edict of Nantes.
<h2>THE NUN OF JOUARRE.</h2>
\
JouARRE is a small town in Normandy. It once
possessed a famous nunnery, which, though long
since in ruins, is still remembered as the home of
Charlotte de Bourbon.
Charlotte,was born in the middle of the sixteenth
[127]
century. Her father, the duke of Montpensier, was of the royal house of Bourbon. As his proper ty had become reduced, and he could not give to his daughter the fortune due to her rank, he resolved
that she should enter into a nunnery.
This was a painful decision to his wife, who was
a friend to the Protestant cause in France. But the duke was a stern Papist, and was resolved that
his will should be obeyed. Before the time came
for Charlotte to be shut out from the world, the mother often took her into a private chamber : there they wept and prayed together. In that retreat the young maiden was instructed in the blessed truths of the gospel—truths which were never wholly forgotten by her. And there, when a few
years older, she signed, by desire of her mother, a
paper, in which she protested against being forced
into a nunnery, and claimed a right, when of riper years, to withdraw from it. It was at an early age, only thirteen, that Char lotte was to be closely confined by the bolts and
bars of that prison-house—the convent at Jouarre. Her young heart had its joys and hopes. She loved
her home. In her esteem the world was fair and
bright, and full of pleasant scenes. Her nature and
temper were active and lively, and she thought
there was much for her to do and enjoy. But now
she was called, in the days of her girlhood, to bid
farewell to those she loved, and to be doomed, as it was called, to a religious life.',
[128]
The Papal church teaches that the surest way of pleasing God, and of leading a holy life, is to quit the world, and to retire to a convent. But the piety
which the Bible enjoins is an active, living thing.
It does not destroy the relations of life; it rather makes known the duties of them. It nowhere de clares that it is in solitude we are to exercise meek ness, patience, and love, but that it is in the midst
of society all the graces of the Christian life are to be exercised and seen. We are to be m the world,
though not of it. We are to u,e the world, though we are not to abuse it. Our light is to shine before men, that they may see our good works, and may
glorify our Father who is in heaven. *
Charlotte was taken by her father to the nunnery.
Her flowing hair was cut away; her dress was
coarse linen and haircloth ; a cord was tied around
her waist; and with downcast looks she trod the iron-bound cloisters by day, and rested at night on the floor of her tomb-like cell. Was she now
happy ? How could she be when she felt that she had been robbed of her freedom ? Did she find the
repose that had been promised her? No; there were sullen discontent and strife where she had
thought to meet with only peace and love. But
never did she more painfully feel the loss of her
liberty than when her mother fell suddenly ill
; for, either from the gloomy rules of the nunnery, or from the fears of her father lest her heart should
* 1 Cor. vii. 31 ; Matt. v. 19.
[129]
be touched by the piety of the dying mother, she was not permitted to visit her. A daughter's care and love might have comforted the duchess in the hour of death ; but this last service of a child's af- f,tion was denied her. Neither was the young nun allowed to be present at the funeral, nor to
visit the grave. A few years passed away, and the nun became
reconciled to her state. She was told that her self- denial and sufferings were pleasing to God, and that the reward of her life would be certain glory in heaven. And so high was the character she obtain ed, that, though still very young, she was raised to be the principal of the convent—the lady-abbess of Jouarre. About this time light entered the doors of the convent, in the form of Protestant tracts. The lady- abbess read them, and they recalled to mind the loving words her mother had spoken to her in the
secret chamber at home. The large Bible, and the
truths it contained, the tears and prayers of her
pious parent, the written protest, and her child- hood's happiness, were all as fresh in her memory
as though they were things of yesterday. The Spirit of God blessed to her soul those plain words of the
little tract—they led her to the cross of Christ. As
the blind man rejoices when his eyes are opened to behold the shining of the sun, so did Charlotte when
the light of the gospel beamed brightly on her heart. 12
[130]
But could she now keep the glorious truths to herself ? Was it not her duty to make them known
to others ? She was soon guided in the right path,
and she began to teach the nuns that they must
not hope, by their own merits, to win heaven, <br
that salvation was by grace, through faith in Christ
Jesus. From this time the life of a nun only filled her with distress ; it could not bring peace to her
enlightened conscience. The counting of beads,
and kneeling before an image of the Virgin Mary, and
praying to saints, had become in her view only
vanity and sin. But what was she to do? If she went to her father's house, he would thrust her from the door. If she fled to any other members
of her family, they would despise her as one who
had broken the most solemn vows. It was now that she felt her bondage. There was no one of whom
she could seek advice, and in this uncertain state of mind she remained in the nunnery, guiding the minds of its inmates to a clearer knowledge of
Christ. While thus engaged, news was brought to the nunnery that war had broken out in France. The
Huguenots, after suffering years of oppression, had
taken up arms, and were engaged in deadly strife with the Papists. It is sad for a land when civil war rages through its borders; and the more so, when it is a war of opposing religions. At length
the conflict reached Normandy j and many were the
[131]
gad scenes there beheld of misery, bloodshed, and
death.
It was in the year 157l, that the noise of a battle was heard around the nunnery of Jouarre. It came
nearer—to the very doors. These were soon broken
open, and the nuns rushed forth to find a shelter in the woods. This was a critical season for Charlotte de Bourbon, She was driven into the world. Was
it not a time for her, thus strangely set free, to act as her conscience told her, and to embrace the lib- erty that was so unexpectedly given to her ? Ought
she any longer to hesitate in obeying the word of God? Should she not seek some place of safety
where she might openly profess the doctrines she had cherished in her soul ? Yes ; the time had come ; but where could she find a home in France ? In such a trying hour there was not time to de liberate—she must act, and act without delay. Char lotte, therefore, hastily set out, passing from one
place to another in disguise. There was no little danger in traveling in France in those days, when
every one found on the road was suspected of being
a Protestant. Yet she safely crossed the country,
and after a time arrived at Heidelberg, in Germany.
In that city she found many Christians ready to welcome her, and confirm her in the doctrines of the
gospel.
As might be supposed, there was no small stir when her flight was known. A nun had fled !
[132]
Who could have supposed that a lady-abbess—the daughter of a duke, and of the royal family of France—would have abandoned the Papal church,
and passed over to the Protestant faith ? There was
dismay in the palace of the king. Confusion and
debate were in the castles of the nobles, and in the convents of the land. Her father threatened that he
would never forgive her. He mourned over her as one mourns over a child that has disgraced her
family ; and as if to show his resentment, he rushed
with greater zeal into the war with the Huguenots.
The poor fugitive had foreseen all that would oc- cur when her flight was known. She would gladly
have obeyed her father, and have rendered to him
the love and honor due from a child. It was not
self-will, nor a stubborn spirit, that led her to brave
his threats. But how could she disobey God, or any longer deny his truth ? The words of the Saviour were not forgotten by her in this hour of
trial : " He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me—and he that taketh not
his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. He that findeth his life shall lose it; and he
that loseth his life for my sake shall find itj, *
Charlotte was now in a land where she could openly declare her faith ; and that she soon did,
standing among thi3 Protestants of Heidelberg, and
upheld by their prayers and good counsels, re-
* Matt. X. 37—30.
[133]
nounced for ever the errors of the church of Rome.
We must now turn our attention to the Low
Countries, better known to many as the Nether lands. This is not one of the parts of Europe
celebrated for its lofty mountains, or its lovely
valleys, or its deep forest glades. It is mostly one unbroken flat, without hill or rock. But though not famous for its natural beauties, it has been long
known as the land of religious freedom. Early in the sixteenth century the Protestant faith spread
through all its towns and villages. The printer was
set to work ; copies of the word of God were multi plied ; and many bold reformers preached the truth
to the people.
The Netherlands at this time belonged to the kingdom of Spain, whose sovereigns were most
violent persecutors of Protestants. Large bands of
soldiers were let loose among them, and thousands were put to death. The Inquisition was set up in
all its terror : multitudes were confined in its dun geons, or by it given over to the rack and burning
pile. One hundred thousand are said to have suf- fered for the truth's sake in the course of half a
century. The patience of the people, however, was
at length worn out. They had long sulfered the
greatest injustice, and they resolved to cast off the
iron yoke that was upon them. They rallied under
12*
[134]
the command of William, prince of Orange, and
after a long contest, secured their freedom. The people of the Netherlands chose the prince
as their ruler. He had been brought up in the
court of Charles the Fifth, emperor of Spain, who
was concerned that he should be educated as a
strict Papist ; and the more so, as the father of the young prince was inclined to the Protestant faith. He, however, when grown to manhood, openly pro- fessed himself to be of that faith. The prince of Orange had often heard of the piety of Charlotte de Bourbon, and the sacrifices she had
made in the cause of truth. And assured that she was fitted to adorn the highest station, he sought
her hand, and she became his wife. She had been
willing to return to her father's house on condition that he would not force her to renounce the Pro testant religion, but rather than agree to her wishes
in this respect, he chose to give his consent to her
marriage, in which case she would live at a distance from him and not annoy him by her presence. The nun of Jouarre was now raised, in the provi dence of Grod, to be the princess of Orange, and the
first lady of rank in the Netherlands. And well did she adorn her high position. Meekness and
prudence, charity and devotion, were at all times
seen in her life. She was a pattern alike to the noble ladies at court, and to the lowly mothers in their families.
[135]
But dark shadows often come over the fairest earthly scenes. Some bitter drops mingle in the
sweetest cup of worldly joy. A large reward had
been offered to any one who should kill the prince,
and a young Papist had agreed to attempt the
horrid deed. To prepare him for his work he
" confessed', to a priest ; and, under the influence of his wretched superstition, he kneeled in prayer
that God would give him success in his design ! It was the Lord's day. The prince and princess
of Orange had returned from Divine worship. As
they were passing along the hall of their palace a shot was fired by the assassin, who had secretly ob- tained an entrance into the house. It entered the neck of the prince, who fell into the arms of his at- tendants. For some time he lay in great danger,
his princess watching over him with the tenderest
love. While dressing his wound, she at the same
time spoke words of peace to encourage his hope in God. Her prayers were heard, and she had the
delight of seeing him slowly restored to health. There was great joy in the city of Antwerp when
the prince and princess went in state to the cathe dral, to return thanks for his merciful deliverance from the hands of the assassin. Nobles and burgo masters, citizens and soldiers were there, to unite with one voice in a song of praise. The church
bells rang merrily, flags were hung at the mast- head of every ship, and sounds of gladness were
l:eard through all the land.
[136]
Not many months, however, had passed away
before the health of the princess began to fail. Her
tender frame had received a shock at the moment
she saw her husband fall, which was further weak ened by her labor and watchings, night and day,
by the side of his sick bed. Her days were now
drawing to a close ; but in the midst of weariness and pain she knew in whom she had believed. Her
soul and life had been given in faith to the Saviour;
she had passed through many trials, and seen many
changes ; and now, relying on the merits of Christ, she looked forward to a crown of glory, that fadeth
not away. At her death there was great mourning
in the land, and weeping crowds followed her body
to its grave in the cathedral of Antwerp.
<h2>THE GUNPOWDER PLOT.</h2>
It was towards the end of the month of October,
1605, that lord Monteagle arrived at his country house in the village of Hoxton, a mile or two
beyond the old walls of London. King James had
issued an order for the parliament to assemble in a few days from this time; and the nobility and
[138]
gentry had arrived from their more distant dwell- ings in the counties, to those they owned in or near
the city of Westminster.
The village of Hoxton in those days was noted
for the mansions of the rich and noble. Fields of corn enclosed by hawthorn hedges, and shady lanes,
whose green banks were adorned in their season with the primrose and daffodil, were seen on every
side. In one direction were the mansions of earls and lords, whose turrets and towers were beheld
from afar. In another appeared groups of pretty
cottage-homes, where latticed porches were adorned
with creeping roses, fragrant jasmine, white elder flowers, and the trailing honeysuckle. While ad- joining the moor (now known as Moorfields) long rows of pollard and chestnut trees lined the grounds,
or shooting-buts, where the London archers at the
close of the day displayed their skill at the long
bow.
Lord Monteagle had i«nvited some friends to supper on Saturday evening, October 26th. As
they sat together in the great oaken hall, just as the evening shades had closed around, a serving man
entered with a letter in his hand. From whence
does it come inquired the lord. The servant could not tell. All he knew was, that as he stood
at the great gate of the house, a tall man, with a broad hat slouched over his face, and a cloak thrown
so as to conceal his form, had suddenly come from
[139]
behind a cluster of treeS; and without speaking a word, had placed the letter in his hand. He had
then (juickly withdrawn, under the shadows of the
twilight.
The lord Monteagle carelessly tossed the letter to a gentleman who was near him, and desired him to read it aloud. The writing was large and cramped
;
it needed care to make out its contents. It spoke of some startling event about to happen. Think not
slightly of this advertisement," said the letter, "but
retire yourself into the country, where you may
expect the event in safety ; for though there be no
appearance of any stir, they shall receive a terrible blow this parliament, yet they shall not see who
hurts them." In earnest words it proceeded
:
This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and do you no harm, for the danger is passed as soon as you have burnt this
letter.'' The letter had no name to it ; from whom could
it come ? No place or date was marked upon it
;
where and when was it written ? Its words were
dark, strange, and solemn; to what could they
refer? They surely meant more than they ex pressed, and their admonition was not to be
slighted.
Early the next morning, lord Monteagle left Hoxton to meet the earl of Salisbury, the lord high
treasurer of England, to whom the letter was
[140]
shown. They then went together to the king.
The matter seemed of sufficient importance to lead
to the calling of a council of nobles, and before them the strange lines were placed. The king
argued it could not be a public outbreak that was
meant, for the words were— There shall be no
appearance of any stir;', yet it was to be " Si terri- ble blow," though by some invisible agent, for they, "were not to see who should hurt them ;" and the deed was to be quickly done. Now, the king's
father, Darnley, the husband of Mary, queen of
Scots, had been destroyed by gunpowder, and it was
at once concluded that an explosion of that com bustible was intended by the dark words of the
letter. Let us now pass to Enfield Chase, a few miles to the north of Hoxton. The spot at this period of time was wild, lonely, and Avoody, and but little visited except by hunters. An old house stood near
a wood, called White Webbs ; and here, in a small room, had met a band of men to agree upon a dark deed of murder. One w,as named Robert Catesby;
his mind had formed the plot, and he was looked upon by the rest as the leader. The others were named Winter, Digby, Tresham, Rookwood, Keys,
Wright, and Percy. They were all men in the rank
of gentlemen : some were rich, and all were Roman
Catholics. But one of the number, Guy Fawkes,
[141]
was to be the chief agent in the design. He had
been a soldier, and was calm, bold, and desperate.
He had lived long in other lands, and, a bigot to his religion, he thought it a work of merit to de- stroy the lives of Protestants. These men had often met before ; sometimes in the fields near London, at other times in a little house on the banks of the river Thames, at Erith. Several months had passed away, and they had been
waiting for a time when the nobles of the land,
with the king and young princes, should meet to- gether for business of the State. It was their hor rid intention to blow up the whole into the air, and
thus at a stroke to rid themselves of the chief
friends of the Protestant faith, and prepare the way
for setting up of the papal religion ! What could have brought these men to imagine
and contrive so wicked a plot ? Some of them had
been fined and opposed for their religion 3 but right
views of Christian liberty were not much known
and understood in those days. Yet the injury they
had received, however occasioned or however un justifiable, could never warrant the dreadful revenge
they were about to take. That men of fortune and
education should unite in such a wicked design is truly strange ; but they had long brooded over it, until the sinfulness of the deed was forgotten.
Perhaps they had been made bold to attempt it by a brief, or letter of authority, which the pope of 13
[142]
Rome had sent to England, in which they were told only to obey a popish king, and that it was for the honor of God and the good of their own souls to re sist a Protestant sovereign. Whatever it was that had filled their hearts with thoughts of murder and
treason, they now placed themselves on their knees,
and took a solemn oath not to betray or forsake one
another. Gerard, a priest, performed mass, gave them the sacrament to sustain their courage in the
enterprise, and to impart to the deed the sanction of their false religion.
As some months had passed since they first con- ceived the wicked plot, Percy had become impatient.
Well, gentlemen,', he said, " shall we always
talk, and never do It was, however, felt by his companions that the time had not yet come. They
must proceed with care, that they might the better make sure of their purpose. They had already hired two houses, one next to the parliament house, and another at a distance, in which they had stored barrels of gunpowder and
large piles of wood. At the former place seven of these men had been digging and working in the hope of getting through the walls to form a mine.
They had dug deep below the cellar, but the walls of the parliament house were three feet thick, and
resisted all their attempts. It was hard work for those who had been brought up as gentlemen. Guy
Fawkes stood at the door as sentinel. When the
[143]
footsteps of a passenger in the street were heard, a
signal was given, and the digging ceased until the
stranger was out of sight. Thus very slowly they went on. They were all well armed, and were re- solved, should they be discovered, to die rather than
surrender. A store of provisions was obtained : hard eggs, dried meats, and such other food as would keep, were in the vault, that they might
awaken no suspicion from the going in and out to purchase food. Though they had toiled hard and long, the trait- ors made but little way. Again and again they
stopped, as though it were hopeless to proceed. And
then at times they were startled by a noise, as of a
tolling bell, and by other strange sounds, which
seemed to come out of the earth. " Is it a warn ing,' ' they said one to another, " that our own fu- neral bell will shortly toll But they tried to quiet their fears, and sprinkled on the wall some
holy water,'' which they had obtained from
a Papal priest. And as again and again they
imagined they heard the tolling of a bell, they as often resorted to the holy water" for protection
and help. Bold as they were, conscience often spoke and awoke alarm in their breasts. How true
it is, " The wicked flee when no man pursueth : but
the righteous are bold as a lion," Prov. xxviii. 1. A poet says,
" 'Tis conscience that makes cowards of us all."
[144]
There can be no peace found in the way of guilt.
Still, Satan and their own wicked hearts urged the
plotters forward in their dreadful course. One day, while they were working in the mine,
they heard a rumbling noise above them. They
were alarmed—had they been discovered ? No ; it was only a man named Bright, a coal-dealer, who
was shovelling his coals into sacks, to carry them away, as he was about to remove from the
cellar under the parliament house to some other spot. They learned that the cellar he was leaving was to be let. How well timed it seemed, for it was just the spot they wanted. It was exactly beneath the
hall wherein the king would meet the nobility of the land. Percy was quickly sent to hire it, under
the pretence that it was to be used for storing wood
and coals. Into this cellar they brought in small
quantities, and secretly at night, to the extent of
thirty-six barrels of gugapowder. Large stones, blocks of wood, and bars of iron were also brought
hither, and laid among the barrels, to give greater
force to the explosion, and make it more destructive
to human life. Over all was cast a covering of wood.
Everything now seemed ready for the fatal mo ment. What could prevent them doing their deed?
They had been all faithful one to another; they were united and resolved ; no one had a suspicion of the plot; all matters hitherto se,ed to be
favorable to it.
[145]
GUY FAWKES' CELLAR.-, The conspirators knew that there would be at the opening of the parliament several of their own
friends ; could anything be done to save them ? Keys
wished to give warning to one of the lords not to be present, for he had given food and shelter to his wife and children when once they were in distress. Percy sought to save an earl who was his kinsman.
Tresham wanted to spare two lords who had married
his sisters, and who were strong Papists. Hence
* In laying the foundation for the New Houses of Parliament at Westminster, it was found necessary to remove this cellar, which for many ages had been associated with the dark deeds of Guy Fawkes.
[146]
their meeting at White Webbs to decide this mat ter. Catesby, however, tried to prove to them that most, or all, of the Roman Catholics would be ab sent. " But with all that," said he, rather than
the project shall not take effect, if they were as dear to me as my own son, they also must be blown
up."
But, unknown to the rest, Tresham had already
sent a letter to lord Monteagle. It was that strange
letter which we have seen delivered at the house
at Hoxton by the tall stranger towards the close of the day.
The conspirators had their last meeting in a
retired walk in Lincoln,s Inn Fields, where they
debated on the chance of the plot being known to the government. Some by this time had become
fearful, and said they were all lost men, and had
better save themselves by instant flight. Others
sought to sustain the courage of their companions
;
by assuring them that all was safe and certain, and
so they parted again.
That evening the lord chamberlain, whose duty
it was to see that all things were ready for the meeting of the king and his lords, came to the parliament house along with lord Monteagle. They
appeared, as if by accident, to descend to the cel lars. As they opened the doors of the one where
the gunpowder was placed, they saw a dark tall man standing near to a pile of wood. It was Guy
[147]
Fawkes, whose nerve and boldness did not even
then forsake him. The lord chamberlain, in an
apparently careless manner, asked who he was. " I am servant to Mr. Percy/ , was the quiet answer, and have the care of his coals.'' " Your master,''
said the chamberlain, ,' has laid in a good stock of
fuel." As the visitors turned themselves to go up
the stairs, Guy Fawkes in bold confidence concludes All is right : still undiscovered." The lord chamberlain reported the results of his search to the king's council. All agreed that the quantity of fuel was much greater than could be wanted by Percy, who had not been known to reside near the spot. Let the cellar be searched again
to-night," was the order given ; and an officer and some guards were to be ready for the purpose. The evening before the meeting of parliament
arrived. Catesby and some of the conspirators had
gone into the country to raise a rebellion as soon as the king and the parliament were blown into the
air. Others had taken their place on the lofty
ground near Highgate, from which place they ob- tained a distant prospect of the roof of the House
of Lords. They were all ready to start at a moment's
notice, to carry out their wretched design in their several ways, as had been arranged. Guy Fawkes
took his place in the cellar, with calm determination. He had received mass at the hands of the priest,
and doubted not of success. His dark lantern, with
[148]
a light in it, was behind the door ; a train of gun powder was carefully laid from the barrels to the entrance ; the slow-burning matches and the touch- wood were at hand. He had a watch, a scarce
article in those days, which was only possessed by
persons of rank and wealth—that he might know
the exact moment when to light the train. A ship
lay not far off in the river, prepared to sail as soon
as the deed was done, to carry him to another land. A horse was saddled to convey him to the ship
;
and, booted and spurred, he awaited the fatal in- stant when the light should be applied to the
train. The clock of Westminster Abbey struck twelve,
and the morning of the 5th of November had begun.
The streets were all silent. Two o,clock soon came
round, and Guy Fawkes softly and slowly opened
the door of the cellar, and stepped out to look about him, and to revive himself with the fresh air. But
he had scarcely placed his feet in the street, when
an officer made a sudden plunge and seized him by
the shoulder. He struggled for a moment to get
back into the cellar, that he might apply a light to the train, and blow himself and the officers of
justice into the air; but others rushed upon him
and cast him on the ground. They soon bound him
hand and foot, and, after a fierce conflict, carried him away to a place of security.
The news rapidly spread through the city that
[149]
king James and his parliament had escaped from
the fearful and wicked plot. Shortly after day break, Guy Fawkes was brought before the lords of the council, confessed to the whole deed so far as himself was concerned, and gloried in it, though he
refused to tell the names of his companions.
Early in the next morning, the prisoner was
traitors' gate, tower of LONDON. conveyed to the Tower of London ; and under the gloomy arch of Traitor's Gate was conveyed to his
cell. After a long trial he was condemned, and at
[150]
the west end of St. PauFs churchyard paid the penalty of his crime by the forfeit of his life. The conspirators stood hour after hour on High gate hill, during the early morning of the 5th of November ; then through the day, expecting to see the dire explosion ; but a messenger brought them
word that Guy Fawkes was arrested. At once they
fled with teiTor and in confusion. Some seized horses
that they found on the road, and passed from place
to place, till they came to Holbeach, a large man sion on the borders of Staffordshire. There they
made a stand, and resolved to fortify the house, and
await their death. As they were getting together
their means of defence, a bag of gunpowder exploded,
burning several of the plotters very severely.
This seemed to them a judgment from heaven for their wickedness. Catesby himself began to fear that God was angry with them, and he and others confessed that their deeds were cruel and sinful be fore God. In a short time the sheriff of the county, with an armed band, reached the house, and suri'ounded it. In the king's name they summoned the rebels to surrender. A short fight followecf, when one of them was disabled by an arrow from a cross-bow. Two others were soon stretched on the ground in dying agony. Catesby and Percy placed themselves back to back in an attitude of defiance, when one
of the sheriff's men fired at them with a doubly
[151]
loaded musket, and they fell. Catesby crawled into a corner of the room, and died ; the other lingered
till the next day. The rest of the party were soon overpowered, and made prisoners. They were
brought to trial, and in due course were executed
for their treason. All loyal and pious hearts were filled with horror while they rejoiced at the wonderful deliverance which God had wrought. The young daughter of
the king, the princess Elizabeth, only eight years
old, thus wrote to her brother, the youthful prince
of Wales : My dear brother, I doubt not that you
have rendered thanksgiving to our gracious God for the deliverance which he has vouchsafed to us, as I have also done, and still do on my own account
;
but I wish to join your vows to my own, and to say with you, ,If the Lord be for us, who shall be
against us? While he keeps me I will not fear what man can do., Such is the brief record of the Gunpowder
Plot.In the discovery of this popish design we see how true it is that God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness;" for His eyes are in every place, beholding the evil and the good."
Sinners, and all their wicked purposes, are known
to him. We may say in the words of the
psalmist :
—
[152]
" They encourage themselves in an evil matter : They commune of laying snares privily
;
They say, Who shall see them? They search out iniquities ; They accomplish a diligent search: Both the inward thought of every one of them, and the
heart, is deep. But God shall shoot at them with an arrow; Suddenly shall they be wounded. So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon them selves ;
—
And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God." PsA. Ixiv. 5—9.
<h2>THE FORFEITED CROWN.</h2>
On the 6th of February, 1685, the heralds pro- claimed before the new palace at Whitehall, that James the Second had succeeded to the crown of England. Coaches, filled with noble ladies, lined the streets. Gentlemen were in groups, on foot or horseback. Flags were hung from house and steeple.
Guns were fired at the Tower ; the church bells rung merrily, the drums and trumpets sounded,
while crowds of people shouted forth their loyalty,
making one mingled din, that passed from street to
street, till the whole town was in an uproar.
It was known that James was a Papist ; but then he had promised fair things ; and the nation hoped
that he would respect their religion and laws. "We
have the word of a king,'' said the most loyal, "and
a king will not break his word.'' " We have our
fears," said others, but we trust all will be for the
best." How James kept his promise, and what deeds were done by his command, the page of history
will tell us.
[154]
It is only three weeks after the king has come to the throne, that an aged man of calm and gentle
looks stands before a judge to answer a charge of
sedition. It is good Richard Baxter, who has long preached Christ,s gospel, and bj his writings has
led many souls to Christ. On the bench sits judge
Jeflfreys—a base, bad man, an enemy to freedom,
truth, and purity—one ever ready to carry out the designs of a tyrant king.
The prisoner has been carried from a bed of sick- ness to the court, and he asks for time to meet the charge. " I will not give him a minute to save
his life,'' cries the judge. We have had to do,'' adds he mockingly, " with other sorts of persons
;
but now we have a saint to deal with, and I know
how to deal with saints as well as sinners.'' The counsel for the prisoner rises to .appeal on his behalf ; and as he speaks of the peaceable spirit of Baxter, who is known to all as a well-wisher to the
royal family, the judge shouts aloud, He is an
old blockhead—an unthankful villain—the spring
of faction—a stubborn dog." Hang him," he
cries, or let him be whipped through the streets.*' Baxter is about to speak again, when Jeffreys
stops him. Richard ! Richard ! Dost thou think we will hear thee poison the court? Thou hast written books enough to load a cart ; and every one
is full of sedition as an egg is full of meat. Hadst
thou been whipped out of thy writing trade forty
[155]
years ago, it had been happy. I will crush you. Now, speak up ; what do you say for yourself
"I am ready to produce my writings,'' is Baxter's answer ; and my life and conduct are known to many in this nation." Fury sits in the looks of the judge, who again
loads him with reproaches, while the prisoner,
turning to those who stand by his side, points to some clergymen who have boldly appeared this day
to speak to his loyal and holy life. There is not an honest man in England," shouts JeiFreys in a
perfect rage, "but who takes thee to be a great
knave."
The mock trial is at length over; and Baxter
is sent to prison, where he must lie till happier
times shall dawn upon the land. *,When I saw," says an eye-witness, "the meek man standing before the flaming eyes and fierce looks of this judge, I thought of Paul standing
before the king. The cruel usage he received drew
plenty of tears from my eyes, as well as from
others of the spectators."
The king of England has no power to make or
set aside any law but with the consent of parlia- ment. This did not suit the proud will of James
the Second. He was resolved to favor the interests of the Roman Catholics, and issued a decree con trary to the law. This decree, or ',declaration,"
[156]
the clergy were ordered to read in the churches. The archbishop of Canterbury and six bishops hastened to the palace, and presented a petition to the king on their knees, begging him to withdraw
his command. But they were rudely spurned from
his presence. In a few days a barge was seen passing down the
river Thames, in which were the seven bishops.
They were on their way to prison. Around them
were other boats, filled with the guards. Crowds
of people were on the banks ; some were kneeling
and begging a blessing from the prisoners as they
moved along, while the air rang with shouts. The bishops were shortly brought to trial. The
charge was that they had refused to obey the king.
From early morning till late in the evening, the
trial went on. At night the jury were locked up
in darkness. Early the next day they came into court with the verdict of " not guilty.,' And then up
rose a shout of joy that made old Westminster hall ring again. The throng without caught the sound,
and sent it rolling along the street. A crowd of people waited to see the bishops come forth, and when
they appeared another shout, louder than ever, was
heard, which rose and fell like the breakers on the
sea-shore. All London seemed to share in the joy;
and as the bishops returned to their homes the people
fell on their knees once more; the bells rang, and
at night bonfires were lighted in every open space.
[157]
King James was at Hounslow reviewing the
troops, and, on hearing a great noise, asked, What
was the matter Nothing but the soldiers shouting for the acquittal of the bishops.', Call you that nothing he asked ; but never mind,
it will be so much the worse for them,,' he proudly
added.
It was soon seen that the great aim of king
James was to discourage and oppress the Protes tants, and to set up the papacy as the great power
in the land. On the second Sunday after he came
to the throne he went in his state coach, with great
pomp, to the royal chapel, and ordered the doors to be set wide open while mass was performed. When
he was crowned he took care that the communion
service after a Protestant form should be omitted. Two papers in support of the doctrines of the church
of Rome were printed by his desire, and sent through
the land; while, on the other hand, the bishops
and clergy were commanded not to preach against the church of Rome. An agent was sent to the
pope, to present the homage of the king; and, in return, an ambassador came from Rome, and was
received with much honor. The highest officer in the university of Cambridge was dismissed, because he would not carry out the popish views of the king; and at Oxford many of the college tutors were deprived of their places for resisting an at- 14*
[158]
tempt to force on them a papist as their head. Monasteries were set up; and such numbers of
priests and monks flaunted through the streets in their robes, that the king boasted he had made the towns and cities of England like those in papal
lands. Nor did the king stop here. Many oflGicers of State who would not change their religion, were re- placed by strict Papists—some of whom were men
of low habits, and wholly unfit to serve the country.
A priest and two Roman Catholic noblemen became
his chief advisers in every matter. He sought to compel his daughter, the princess Anne, to join the church of Rome ; and next to deprive his eldest daughter Mary, the wife of the prince of Orange,
of her right as heir to the throne because she was a
Protestant. At last, he carried matters to such a
point, that even the Spanish ambassador warned
him of his danger. Does not your master consult with priests asked the king. "Yes,'' was the
reply, and that is the reason why our country's
affairs go on so badly.
The heavy hand of a tyrant was felt to be on the
liberties of the country. The king levied taxes in his own name, and claimed a right to put aside the laws of the land by his own power. Four thousand
Protestant soldiers were refused their pay, and sent
to wander hungry and half-naked through the land. All who were thought to be unfriendly to his doings were fined, whipped, or sent to prison.
[159]
The king had not sat long on his throne, when
the news was spread that the duke of Monmouth,
the king's nephew, and the .earl of Argyle, had
raised the flag of rebellion. But their plans were
rash and badly managed. They had no money, no
arms, nor any promise of support from the people.
The king's troops soon overthrew them, and the
lives of these two noblemen were forfeited. Now was a time for the king to show mercy to the followers of the rebel chiefs. By such a course he might win the hearts of many, and turn the tide
in his favor. One of the prisoners was brought be fore him. You know it is in my power,'' said the king, to pardon you.'' Yes," said the man,
who well knew his cruel character, but it is not
in your nature." However unwise this answer was,
its truth was soon seen. Judge Jeffreys was sent with a troop of soldiers
to punish all rebels, and every one who had shown
them any favor. Among others was a pious and
aged woman, lady Alice Lisle, who was charged
with hiding two men in her house. She was not aware that they had been in arms against the king;
and the jury who tried her felt that there was no
proof of guilt. But the king's commands must be
obeyed; she must not be spared. The sentence of death was passed, and she went forth to the block
in a spirit worthy of her high Christian character. Hundreds of unhappy prisoners, more or less
[160]
guilty, were hung ia a few days, The country for
six miles between Exeter and Bristol," says one who saw the sad scene, ,' had a new and terrible
sort of sign post ] the heads of the executed were
placed in rows on poles by the road side." Other
prisoners were burned alive, and some escaped by
paying large bribes. The judges, and other persons
in power, had many that were found guilty made
over to them as gifts, that they might be sold as
slaves, or ransomed at a large price by their friends. Thousands were carried to the West India islands
to labor in slavery. Among those condemned to be
sold were twenty-seven young ladies at Taunton,
whose offence was that they had given a flag and a Bible to the duke of Monmouth. They were saved from slavery by the payment of a great sum, which was divided among the queen's maids of honor as a " Christmas box.'' For weeks Jeffreys went forward in his career of
blood. The nation looked on with horror at the
terrible doings, and deep and bitter were the
feelings that came over men's minds.
While the people were thus borne down they
heard that James had received twenty thousand
pounds from Louis, king of France, to aid him in his designs. Then the news came that a pitiless war was raging against the Protestants of France,
many of whom escaped to England. And as they
told of their bitter trials, the people saw what they
[161]
might expect should James succeed in setting up
the Papal religion in the land. All Protestants were alike oppressed by the king. Places of worship were shut up, and ministers dragged to prison. They then met in small numbers
in private houses, late in the evening or early in the morning. There were friends who stood at the doors always on the watch to give notice of danger. They
made windows or holes in the walls between two
houses, that the preacher's voice might be heard in more places than one. They had often secret pas- sages and trap doors for their escape. In country towns and villages they went through back yards
and gardens that they might not be noticed. For
the same reason they never sang psalms, and the
minister was placed in some inward part of the house that his voice might not be heard in the
streets. But the time came when men not only whisper ed, but spoke openly of their country's wrongs.
Christian ministers, the officers of the army and
navy, and the great body of the people, groaned
under their bondage. There was no law but the
king's will; no justice or safety in the land. They
asked if it were not right in them to maintain their
religion and their laws. We have been trodden
to the ground," said many; shall we not seek to stand up as free-born Britons ?" Yes," said
others, ,' the king has stretched the bow to such a degree that some day it will snap asunder."
[162]
All eyes were turned to William, prince of Orange, who had married Mary, the eldest daughter
of James. He was a man of talent, of good cha racter, and a zealous Protestant. Near to the town of Maidenhead, on the banks of the Thames, stood a mansion, known as Hurley
house. It was a fine, old building, around which
the river flowed in its winding course, and before it spread out to view a lovely landscape. Often in
VAULT UNDER HURLEY-HOUSE. the early part of the year 1688 there met, in a gloomy vault beneath this house, several noblemen
and others. They spoke of the helpless and hope-
[163]
less state of the country under tbe reign of James,
and resolved, if he would not grant them redress,
to apply to the prince of Orange for aid. Seven
of them signed a paper, calling on the prince to come to England, and defend their cause. While the English nobles at home made ready for the conflict, the prince fitted out his ships and
collected his troops. By the end of October the Protestant east wind,', as it was called, carried the fleet towards the shores of England.
There were many praying hearts in Britain and
Holland that God would grant success to this enter prise. Public feeling was raised to the highest
point; and soon was heard from the clifls of Torbay
a cry that the ships had reached the English coast. Seven hundred vessels bore the invading army.
On the flag of the prince's ship were the words,
I WILL MAINTAIN THE PrOTESTANT RELIGION
AND THE LIBERTIES OF ENGLAND.',
On the 5th of November, 1688—eighty-four years after the discovery of the popish plot to blow
up the Houses of Parliament, on the same day of the month—prince William landed at Torbay amidst
the shouts of the people. An ofiicer rode at full speed, bearing the tidings to James at Whitehall. The king turned pale, a letter in his hand fell to the ground, and he stepped aside to weep. James now found what it is to be served only
from fear. In the hour of his need he was without
[164]
one who truly loved him. Nobles and gentry soon
joined the ranks of the prince of Orange; and
many to whom the king had shown favor deserted him. Opposed by his own son-in-law, betrayed by
his courtiers, with an army that could not be trust- ed, and shunned by the people, he tasted the last bitter drop in his cup of grief when he was told that
his daughter, the princess Anne, had also fled from
him. Then was wrung from him the bitter wail,
Oh, help ! my very children have forsaken me.'' Early in the morning of the 11th of December,
[165]
a common hackney coach left Whitehall. It hurried down to the river side. Two persons stepped from it into a boat awaiting them on the Thames. As they passed by Lambeth, one of them
threw a box into the water, and then landing on
the opposite shore, they both hurried along the road that led to the county of Kent. In a short time the royal chamber was found empty. The
king had fled ! He, and one of his household, were the persons who had crossed the water, and
in the box thrown into the stream was the great
seal of England.
After passing from town to town, James got on
board a small ship, and arrived in France. The
pope's ambassador rushed out of London in the dis- guise of a footman; and judge Jeffreys was caught
in the dress of a sailor, wearing an old tarred hat,
at a low public house in Wapping. A shout of joy was raised by the people when they heard of the capture of thfe wicked man. To sav, him from
their fury, he was taken to the Tower of London,
where he soon ended his days as a prisoner.
Thus closed the reign of James the Second. It was short, unhonored, and is a blot on the page of English history. From first to last it was without
a single event that was for the honor of the king or the happiness of his subjects. By a wise course he
might have reigned over a loyal and loving people
:
15
[166]
but he sought to overthrow the Protestant religion,
and to raise a corrupt church on its ruins. It ended
in the loss of his crown. On the flight of James, England was without a king or a ruler. The prince of Orange soon called together the peers and those gentlemen who had
been members of the last parliament. After solemn
debate, it was declared by them that the throne was vacant, that James had forfeited the crown, and that the prince and princess of Orange should be king and queen. They also agreed to a bill of
rights,, , which set forth the great principles of the
British constitution, and secured to the people
many valuable privileges, among which was a merciful and just regard to the laws of the land. The strength of the throne and the freedom of the
people of England—the home of our ancestors
—
were thus provided for. May young Protestants know how to value their civil and religious advan tages, and be grateful to God that the country in which their forefathers were born was saved, in the days of James, from the craft of the church of Rome.

<h2>THE STORY OF THE ENGLISH BIBLE.</h2>
The Sabbath sun rises and sets, bringing to our
hearts and homes unnumbered blessings. The
gospel is preached to thousands; and hosts of
children, in the quiet of their own dwellings, or amid the cheerful hum of the Sunday-school, read
the holy book of God. We may apply to these times the prophecy of old : They shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig-tree; and
none shall make them afraid,', Micah iv. 4. But
how seldom do we remember the wearisome labors, and the long and deadly struggles of holy men in former ages, in their efforts that the people might
have, in all its freeness and fullness, a cheap and
open Bible. We will go back in our thoughts to other times,
and, with grateful feelings, trace the steps which led
to this blessed result. It was in the year 1428, or thereabouts, a man,
named Lawrence Coster, was seen walking on the
outside of the walls of the old city of Haarlem, in Holland. His pace was slow, and it was evident
[168]
that his mind was engaged in deep thought. As he
walked, he came to a grove, and there with his knife he cut a piece of bark from a tree. He paced
up and down beneath the shade of the grove, and
amused himself with carving the bark. Now and
then he paused, and then again went on with his work. As he turned to go home he found he had
cut the shape of a number of raised letters on the
face of the bark. That evening he sat down in his house, and carved more letters on other pieces of wood. When he had done several in this way he
fastened them together by a piece of string. Some
ink was then made thick, and rubbing the faces of the letters with it, he pressed a sheet of paper
against them. He gazed on what he had done with
surprise, and well he might. To him it was the
first idea of printing. He had made the earliest attempt, in Europe at least, of impressing on paper
the thoughts of the mind. There was hope for the world in those pieces of bark tied together by a
string.
A few years passed away, and anothej man, of the name of Gottenberg, was busy in a small work shop in the German city of Mentz, cutting letters. This time, however, they were not made of wood or bark, but of metal. Nor were several carved on one
piece of wood, each was a separate type, or letter. Something of a machine, too, called a press, had
been formed, and with these metal types he soon set
[169]
about printing books. The volume that was print- ed was a Latin Bible. It was not finished, as it would be now, in a few weeks ; but nearly eight years passed before it came from the workmen's
hands. Every one who saw it was astonished. Copy after copy was sent forth, all exactly alike, and it seemed as if they had been produced by
miracle. Who could write them so fast? How
could they be made so rapidly ? Why was it that they all appeared alike—page for page, line for line, the same to the smallest dot ? Men knew but little of this infant art, nor did they foresee, in its first efibrts, the earnest of the richest blessings to all mankind. Surely, it was well that the first volume
thus printed was the best book—that it was God's
book. It was the pledge of the great things to be done by the discovery of the art of printing, in giving the Holy Scriptures to every nation on the
earth. Let us now trace another step in the course that
led to a free and full Bible for the people.
England was to receive the benefit of the new
art, in conveying to it the Scriptures in the lan- guage of the people, through the means of William
Tyndale. This worthy man was born on the bor- ders of Wales, of parents who were in a humble con dition of life. How little did they think, as they
looked on him in his infancy, that he would become
15*
[170]
one of the best friends of his country, and that his name would be held by many in more honor than
any conqueror who ever lived ! In the course of time, William Tyndale became a poor priest of one of the colleges in Oxford. As he
sat one day with some fellow priests, he spoke of the value of the word of God, when they mockingly
said, We are better without Grod's law than the pope's law.'' To which Tyndale replied : " If God
spare me, before many years I will cause a boy that driveth a plough to know more of the Scriptures than you do." The young priest saw that the people were living
and dying without Bible knowledge, deceived by the vain doctrines of the church of Rome, and he
quietly resolved to get the New Testament printed
in English for the use of all. This was a good and
great thought—a bold and daring thought—for a poor man to cherish ; yet, with the help of God, he was resolved to make the attempt. He was not
content to plan and arrange this important work,
but with labor and patience he sought to carry it forward. Tyndale had heard of the learning and riches of
the bishop of London, and in his simplicity he
thought he would surely aid him in the pious de- sign ; but he soon found that there was ,' no room
in my lord of London's palace to translate the word
of God, nor any safe place to do it in all England.',
[171]
At this time there lived in London a pious and
wealthy merchant, named Monmouth, who had been
taught the truth through reading the books of the reformers in Germany. He was a kind friend to Tyndale, and gave him a room in his house, where
the good priest used to sit, night and day, busy with
his pen and Latin Bible. But these were times of danger to those who truly feared Grod. Tyndale,
therefore, well supplied with money by his liberal patron, set sail over the North Sea, and went to the
great city of Hamburg. Then, removing to Cologne,
he went on in the translation and printing of the New Testament, until ten sheets were done. Two pious friends. Frith and Roye, * assisted Tyndale in the translation. There they sate, day
by day, in an old-fashioned room in an obscure
street in the city of Cologne. Pens, parchment,
and paper were before them ; one read the Latin
Bible, a second the Greek, and the third wrote down the words of the sacred text in English. In
about a year this work was finished. Tyndale then found a printer who was willing to print it. This was a service full of danger. Popish priests were
on the alert to find out any who aided the reformers
, in their work. But onward the printing went. In
this state of things, an agent of the Inquisition
found out what was going forward. He heard that
* These pious men were martyrs in the cause of truth : the first was
burned in Smithfield, July, 1553 ; the other sufiered the same dreadful death in Portugal.
[172]
a learned Englishman was in the city, and that some
printers had been heard to say that soon all England
would become Protestant. This man thought he
would find out what all this boasting meant. So
with much craft he made friends with the printers,
and invited them to his house. Here he well sup plied them with wine. In the midst of their mirth
they made known the secret, that some hundreds
of copies of the New Testament in English were in the press, which were to be secretly carried over
the seas by the merchants. The next morning the
printer's house was surrounded by officers, and the
press was seized ; but not before Tyndale, warned
of the danger, ran to the rescue of his printed
sheets, which he threw into a boat, and pushed his way from the shore. Sailing up the river Rhine
he soon came to a safer place of labor. Often had
the small ships of those days passed along this famous river with the wares and wealth of the merchants of Germany, but never did one carry so rich a treasure as was in the boat which conveyed
Tyndale and the Bible sheets to the city of Worms.
After great pains, and cost, and toil, the last sheet
of the New Testament was completed. Fifteen hundred copies were printed—a large edition in those days ; and now the bread of life seemed pre- pared for the people of his own dear native land. English merchants took charge of the books, and
carried them to England along with articles of
[173]
commerce. The precious volume was packed in
bales, and sent to London, Norwich, and Oxford. There they were readily bought by the rich, but
though they were sold at a cheap rate, only a few
of the poor could save money enough to purchase
the holy book. Soon, however, they were found
spread over the land, and many souls rejoiced in the Grospels and Epistles, which for the first time were held in their hands, and now cherished in their hearts. Some, on receiving a portion of the
precious book, fell on their knees, and thanked God
with tears of joy for ifc. When the Roman Catholic bishop of London was
told that the printed books were coming fast to En gland, he was filled with alarm and anger. He soon
sent out orders to make a diligent search among the merchants of London and the students of Oxford,
for the forbidden work. Among the latter, some of
those who were found to have it were thrust into a dungeon, where four of them soon died. Others were made to carry fagots of wood, and with them
to kindle a fire, into which their own hands had to cast the books. As the flames rose into the air, the people were solemnly warned against the read- ing of the word of God.
But the hope of burning the New Testament out
of the land was all in vain. The printer-priest
kept working off more copies, and they were taken
across the seas hidden in the corn which was
[174]
carried to England, at a time when great scarcity was felt. Thus bread to feed the body, and the bread of life for the soul, came in the same ships,
and were together sent through the land. Decrees were issued against the possession of the New Testament ; the seaports and ships were strict- ly watched ; the warehouses and houses were search- ed; but still the blessed books arrived. Sometimes
even Jews brought them over the seas. They came
in pedlars' packs, and in boxes of merchandise
—
now in one way, and then in another. At length, the bishop of London hit upon a cunning plan, as he vainly thought, of putting
a stop to the arrival of these books. He supposed,
that if every copy could be bought up in the place
where they were printed, the work would soon be
at an end. A London merchant was engaged to do
this business. Do your diligence to get them,''
said the bishop, and I will pay for them whatso ever they cost you.'' The merchant ordered his ship to be ready without delay, and crossing the
seas, offered to buy up all the stock in hand. The
bargain was soon made : the bishop had the books, the merchant the thanks, and Tyndale the money ! A few days after the books were safely in the charge of the bishop, a number of people were seen making their way along Cheapside and up Ludgate
Hill. It was reported that there was to be a great sentence passed, to be followed by an'execution. As
[175]
they came to St. PauFs Cross, a large fire was send- ing up clouds of smoke high above the house-tops.
And now the bishop's ofiicers came with the poor
prisoners—the Testaments, which were cast one by
one into the flames, while a priest stood in the old stone pulpit in the open space, and loudly praised
what was being done. But when all was over, many in that crowd could not but think how wicked
and how shameful it was thus to burn God's holy
book.
As a further proof of their anger, the priests seized Tyndale's brother, John, and one of his
[176]
friends. Then they set them on horseback, their faces turned to the tails of the horses, with bundles
of New Testaments hung around them. In this manner they were made to ride through the streets of London, and on coming to St. PauFs to throw
the books into the fire. But—how great the dismay—New Testaments were still brought to England ! The bishop soon
sent for the merchant, and cried, How is this,
sir ? Did you not promise and assure me that you
had bought them all?" Yes,', was the reply;
I bought all that then were to be had, but I per- ceive they have made more since ; and it will never be better so long as they have the letters and the
presses ; therefore it were best for your lordship to buy them too, and then you are sure." The bishop
only smiled at this answer, for he thought that, if he parted with more money, other letters and press es would be bought with it, and he should only
serve to aid the cause he wished to crush. Finding how vain were all attempts to stop the
circulation of the New Testaments, the next plan was to secure their author. Spies were sent over
to decoy him to England. Though ready to sufier anything in his heavenly Master, s work, he would
not willingly throw himself into danger. Craft,
however, brought him into the hands of his enemies. While quietly pursuing his labor beneath the
hospitable roof of an English friend, named Poyntz,
[177]
at the city of Antwerp, two wolves in sheep's
clothing came to the house—one in the disguise of
a merchant ; the other, who was a monk, was dress- ed as his servant. They pretended great interest in the doctrines of the Bible Christians, and were soon welcomed to their society. But Phillips—for that was the name of the pretended merchant—came to watch Tyndale, and, if possible to seize him.
One day, when Poyntz went some miles distant on business, a snare was laid for the noble reform er. Phillips called on Tyndale to borrow forty shil- lings, under the excuse that he had lost his purse on the road. They then agreed to walk out to- gether. There was a long narrow passage to go
through, leading to the street. Phillips drew back,
as if politely to allow his friend to go first, when
two officers were seen standing at the door. Take
your prisoner,,' cried the pretended friend, and in a moment Tyndale was in their grasp, while Phillips hastened to receive from the priests the reward of
his treachery.
Tyndale was carried to a castle eight miles from
Brussels, and placed in a close chamber. Here he remained for some time, but his faith in Christ made the gloomy prison a place of hope and of happiness to him. His way of life was so holy, that the other prisoners said, Well, if he is not a good Christian man, we know not in whom to 16
[178]
trust." Through his teaching the jailer and his daughter were converted to God.
But once in the power of his enemies, nothing
could save him from their wrath From that castle he did not come out till eighteen months had passed,
and then only to die as a martyr.
At length, in October, 1536, he was condemned
as a heretic, and ordered to be burned. On being
fastened to the stake, he raised his eyes to heaven,
and cried, Lord, open the eyes of the king of England.' ' His prayer was heard ; for, before three years had passed away, king Henry of England gave
his consent to the circulation of the Bible, in the
native tongue, throughout the kingdom. Thus per- ished this noble man, one of England's best reform-
[179]
ers ; as some one has said of him, " In putting the New Testament into the hands of Englishmen, he
gave them the charter of salvation, the book of
eternal life; while his own history affords a beautiful example of its purifying and saving power, under
the blessing of the Holy Spirit."
We pass on to another stage in the history of the English Bible. King Henry the Eighth began his reign as a good friend of the pope After a while, a quarrel
arose, and he took the religious affairs of his king dom into his own hands. This gave rise to hope
in the hearts of all Bible-readers: They now ex- pected to enjoy the truth unmolested. The king's
favorite adviser, Cromwell, earl of Essex, was a
friend to the circulation of the Scriptures, and he
determined to have a complete edition printed in the English language. For this purpose he sent Cover dale, a pious and learned man, to the city of Paris,
where the best printing was then done, to superin- tend the work. Although protected by the Eng lish ambassador, the pope ordered the printers not
to proceed. The agents of the Inquisition were
sent to seize the work; yet not till Coverdale, who
before the storm burst on him had seen the gather ing clouds, had secreted a quantity of the half- printed sheets, and conveyed them privately beyond
their reach. A large portion, however, fell into
[180]
their hands : some were burned, and as much as "four great dry vats fulF, were sold to a haber- dasher to lap his caps in.'' Coverdale fled to Lon don, where the book was again put into the press, and was, without further hinderance, Fynisshed
Apryle, anno, 1539,', and soon had an extensive
sale. From its size, it was called The Great
Bible.'' The clergy were then required to provide one boke of the whole Bible of the largest volume
in English, to be set up in the churches before Christmas."
There were not many of the common people then who knew even the use of books. Any one who
could read was deemed quite a clerk," and a little crowd would gather around him, while others
sat or stood listening to the blessed truths of God.
Many persons who had the money bought the
book, though it cost a very large sum. As a proof
of the desire to possess it, a farmer, it is said, once gave a load of hay for two or three chapters of the New Testament. Many elderly people learned to read on purpose to peruse for themselves God's holy
book ; and even little children flocked among the
rest to hear portions of it read. Truly, the word
of the Lord was precious in those days."
At the death of Henry, his son, Edward the
Sixth, succeeded to the throne. He began his short reign when quite a youth ; but young as he was,
[181]
he gave promise of great devotedness to the in- terests of true religion. On his coronation day,
when he beheld the three swords used on such
occasions, he asked where the fourth was. His
lords looked up with surprise, and asked what he
meant. ,' The Bible,', he answered; that book is the sword of the Spirit, and is to be preferred be fore these swords : without that, we are nothing, we
can do nothing, we have no power.,' He loved the Bible himself ; he knew, from sweet experience,
that its truths were precious to the soul. During
his reign, which lasted only six years and a-half, the press was fully employed ; fifty editions of the Bible were issued ; and numbers of the people were
nourished by its truths. But Mary, who next sat on the English throne, was a cruel bigot. One of her first law,s was to stop the people from reading the Bible. She had
resolved to bring the whole nation back to Popery.
Then came dark days to England. Again people were called upon to choose between Bible religion
and Popery ; and at what a fearful risk men chose
the former ! It was the Bible and death ; yet there were not only men, but delicate women and chil- dren, who counted not their lives dear to them for the steadfast love they bore to the word of God.
Good John Rogers was the first of that noble band
of English martyrs who at this time sealed their attachment to the Saviour by their blood. 16*
[182]
In spite of laws and spies, many a little con- gregation used to steal away into the thick forests, to lonely fields, to cellars and barns, to read the book of life. In Fox's "Book of Martyrs," we
have a pleasing little picture of a pious company
who went to the borders of St. John's Wood, then
a wild and lonely spot on the north-west of London.
It was the morning of May-day, and, while their neighbors were dancing around the Maypole, they were engaged in listening to the word of God. But
the constables, with staves and spears, broke upon
'
them as they sat under the trees, and arrested them. They were all committed to prison, and
soon after, thirteen were burned for hearing the word of God read, and believing its truths ! Everywhere the enemies of the Bible were on the watch. They cast into prison, or placed in the
stocks, the faithful servants of God ; many of whofti,
refusing to return to the Papal faith, were brought
to the burning pile. Thus fell three hundred of England's best subjects
—
hest, because they loved and obeyed the word of God—victims to the bigotry
of the cruel Mary.
After an unhonored reign, Mary died, unloved,
and unlamented ) and her sister Elizabeth ascended
the throne. There was a custom in these times, on
the coronation of a prince, to release prisoners;
whep this had been done, and men long bound came
[183]
forth to light and freedom, one of Elizabeth's lords
said, There are yet four or five others to be freed."
Ah, who are they?'' she asked. Matthew, Mark,
Luke, John, and Paul,'' was the answer; "they
have been long shut up, so that they could not talk
to the common people, who are eager to see them
abroad again." Elizabeth was a Protestant, and
she was ready enough to let the good evangelists go
free. Soon the cruel laws of her sister were re- pealed, and the books went out again among the
people, who, as you may well suppose, received them
gladly. A law was made that every parish church
should be provided with a Bible, and that every parson should have a Testament for his own private use." How curious does such a law seem to us, when no minister, we should think, would be found
without a New Testament in his study. Before
the close of Elizabeth's reign, there were two hundred and sixteen editions of the Bible issued from the English press, a great many more
than were published in all the other parts of Europe.
About one hundred years had passed away since good William Tyndale turned printer, that he might
give his translation of the New Testament to his countrymen : now we come to an important period
in the history of the English Bible. James the
First became sovereign of England at the death of
[184]
queen Elizabeth. Shortly after the festivities at- tendant upon his coronation were over, a great
council was held in the winter of 1604, at Hampton
Court palace, a few miles from London. The ob ject of this meeting was to settle some church diffi- culties which had sprung up in the last reign ; but
it is chiefly interesting to us on account of an im portant measure issuing from it—a new and able translation of the Bible; and it is the translation then ordered to be made that is used by us at the
present time, and called the authorized version."
The great work was done by many hands. Fifty- four of the most learned and distinguished divines were selected for this important business. These
were divided into six companies, to whom were as- signed diff'erent portions of the sacred volume. The
first met at Westminster, with the books of Moses,
and all the Jewish history to the second book of Kings, for their work. Dr. Andrewes, whose
learning was held in high estimation all over Europe, presided over this division. The second,
under the charge of Dr. Lively, met at Cambridge,
and they translated from Chronicles to Canticles. The third assembled at Oxford, under Dr. Harding;
their portion was from Isaiah to Malachi. The
fourth also met at Oxford, laboring upon the
Gospels, Acts, and Revelation. The fifth, at West minster, translated the Epistles. The sixth, at Cambridge, undertook the Apocrypha.
[185]
Each one of a division took the same chapter,
and having translated it in his own study, they all met together and compared their work : if they did not agree, they altered it and improved it, until the
best translation was agreed upon; it was then sent
to the other companies for examination. After the whole was completed, it was carried to London,
where some learned men from each university met
and examined it anew; and these last learned
doctors gave nine months' hard labor to the revi sion. A great deal of care and time and learning
and study were thus bestowed upon this work, which
have made the translation so valuable and enduring. In 1611, it was published as a noble folio Bible,
which has been a fountain of life to thousands and
thousands who read the English language. Blessed he God for a full, cheap, and free Bible,
It is no longer a book shut up from the people
—
written on large sheets of parchment, and unfitted
in weight and size for common use. It is not now
lying only on the shelves of college libraries, cover- ed with the dust of ages. It is not bound and seal- ed by the cruel laws and wicked devices of popes and kings. We give thanks to God that the Bible
is the birthright of every child in our land. We
remember what we owe to the bold and holy men
who set it at liberty, and gave it wings. We hold
their memories in reverence for their courage and
[186]
fidelity in the midst of toil and opposition, and with
exile and martyrdom before their eyes. We see them enduring all in hope and faith, that God's
word might go free and bless the souls of men.
For this did many a martyr bleed,
Tlie aoble and the brave, That truth its onward course might speed, 3Ien of all lands and tongues be freed, And life eternal have. We'll prize our blessed Bible then
—
What suflfering it has cost I What tears and groans of godly men. Who won it with their mortal pain, That we might not be lost. Shall we lay it on the shelf aside, And all its blessings spurn ? No ; deep within our hearts we'll hide
Its truths, whatever may betide
—
God give us grace to learn ! What would Peter Waldo and Wyclifife and
Luther and Tyndale say, could they now visit us, and see the Holy Scriptures in the hands of all people and even little children ! With what delight
would they gaze on the poor man's twenty-five cent Bible and the Sunday scholar's eight cent Testa- ment ! And with what a shout of hallelujahs and
hosannas would they look on the two hundred dif- ferent versions of the book of God, issued by the Bible Societies, in various languages of the earth ! But blessed are our eyes, for they see and our ears, for they hear those things which many prophets
[187]
and righteous men desired to see and have not seen them, and to hear, and have not heard them.
Matt. xiii. 16, 17. We behold the Bible in the
pulpit, in the family, and in the school-house. There it is for all, and within the reach of all, and
making known the message of God's love to all who
will hear it. May we have grace to receive that message. It proclaims to us the delightful truth, God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life," John iii. 16. It makes
known to us that a sinner is justified only by faith in Christ Jesus, whose blood cleanseth us from all sin ; who is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him ; and who will not cast out any that do come. * It gives to us the promise of the Holy Spirit, whose grace and power convince us
of sin, renew our heart, comfort us in distress, and
make us meet for the joy and purity of heaven, †
Let us, then, read the Bible with diligence, faith and prayer, and with a sincere desire to obey all its commands. And if there be those who would seek
to turn us away from this blessed book, we will say wath that great and honorable man, Robert
Boyle: "The Bible is a matchless volume: it is impossible we can study it too much, or esteem it * Rom. iii. 2.5, 26 ; 1 John i. 7 ; Heb. vii. 2.:) ; John vi. 37.
† John xvi* 7, etc.
[188]
too highly." We will declare with the learned Sir William Jooes : "The Bible contains more true sublimity, more exquisite beauty, purer morality, more important history, and finer strains both of poetry and eloquence, than could be collected from
all other books that were ever composed in any age
or nation." We will say with the poet Milton
:
There are no songs to be compared with the songs
of Zion." We will assert with that wise man, John
Locke : "The gospel has God for its author, salva- tion for its end, and truth, without any mixture of
error, for its matter." And with the renowned
John Selden we will cry, There is no book in the world upon which we can rest our souls in a dying
moment but the Bible."
And whilst have a free and full Bible, and
need not retire to the shelter of the forest to read
its sacred pages, for fear of a dungeon or a cruel death, we will think of other lands where super stition and ignorance prevail, and hope and pray
for the time when God's book shall be known
through all the earth. Oh ! send God's holy book where'er Or winds can waft, or waters bear ; Let India's sons its page revere, Let Afric's land the blessing share. , Send it to where, expanded wide, The South Sea rolls its farthest tide
;
To every island's distant shore, Mnke known the Saviour's grace and power.
[189]
Seod it to every dungeon's gloom, Send it to every poor man's room ; Nor cease the woe-worn to befriend, Nor cease the heavenly gift to send. 0 Holy Ghost ! who gave the word, With thine own truth thy light aflFord, Give thou the quickening, saving power. On all the earth thy blessings shower.
Let grace thus turn each wanderer's eye To Him who did for sinners die, And sin and sorrow hence be driven, And earth be chang'd from earth to heaven.
17





